
8 Introduction
as a mode of resistance to individualist, careerist, and bibliometric univer-
sity cultures. Research-­creation, on this reading, is a potent pedagogical
method of resistance within a university landscape that, in the wake of Bill
Readings’s () canonical “university of excellence,” has emerged as the
enduringly neoliberal “university of business” or the “all-­administrative
university” (Ginsberg ).
    This “all-­administrative university” depends on new economies and
ecologies of university life grounded not only in an untenably precarious
and exploited labor force (with adjunct and sessional positions replacing
tenure-­track ones) and the progressive turning of professors into “busy-­
work” administrators at all levels of the university, but ever increasing
speeds of production than earlier models of art and humanities schol-
arship. This is a university landscape governed by the desire for clear
and immediate individualized impact metrics, by greater online, infor-
mational (rather than critical interpretive) content in classes, larger class
sizes, fewer full-­time professors, and any putative research time that is
imagined to come with the job of “professor” eaten away at by increasing
administrative tasks as a result of fewer academic hires combined with ex-
treme cuts to administrative positions. In this context, research-­creation,
in any configuration, with the extra resources, time, and engagement
that it requires, may seem a fool’s errand. Indeed, the rise of research-­
creation can be, and has been, read as an attempt on the part of the neolib-
eral university to accreditize and instrumentalize every one of its corners,
including artistic practice, making us all do triple the labor in half the time
and with less and less support.
    Without denying the conditions that are (alas) the case, in this book I
assert research-­creation as more than this. I claim research-­creation as the
logical outcome of interdisciplinary, conceptual, and social justice/activist
legacies in contemporary art such as those that stretch from Mary Kelly
to Bracha Ettinger, or Hans Haacke to Beatriz da Costa, or Joseph Beuys
to Tania Bruguera; it is an extension of the pedagogical turn in the arts to
which I referred above (Joseph Beuys’s infamous  walkout “Democ-
racy Is Merry” and his Free International University come to mind here,
alongside more recent extra-institutional pop-­up universities such as the
Copenhagen Free University and the School of Panamerican Unrest).16
As the past few decades (at least) have taught us, when the dialogic and
pedagogical start to be used as artistic material, the university becomes


both a site of institutional critique and an exploratory playground (Bour-
riaud ; Kester, ; Kwon ).
   What I am trying to highlight here is that while it is fair to say that
research-­creation is, in many important ways, driven by institutional de-
sires to increase university funding profiles, it has, at the same time, ev-
erything to do with longer (interdisciplinary, feminist, and other social
justice) shifts in how we do arts and humanities thinking, as well as with
dialogic and pedagogical shifts in the world of artistic production and dis-
course. These art-­world shifts have had profound effects not only on the
artworks/events/projects that animate our contemporary biennial, trien-
nial, and exhibition circuits, but on the worlds of art history, theory, and
criticism that have flowed out from these disciplinarily intertwined loca-
tions into other spaces of the university. In other words, rather than new
or alien, research-­creation is very much entwined with endogenous drives
in contemporary art practice, theory, and history.17
   Simply put, and to reiterate: While artistic perspectives, methods, and
skills are central to the critical discourse of research-­creation, what distin-
guishes research-­creation from an already robust world of twentieth-­and
twenty-­first-­century art practices with research bases is a new institutional
context in the form of national granting structures for university-­based
art practices leading to new graduate degree granting programs. As such,
research-­creation is a category produced within, with, and for an ever-­
adapting university landscape. While it is true that research-­creation is
crucially informed by new and historical directions in the field of the pro-
fessional fine arts (that is, grounded in a history of social, pedagogical,
dialogic, conceptual, and institutional critique in the visual arts), and that
research-­based, theoretically driven art is everywhere in the art world, in
this book I attend to research-­creation, first and foremost, as an urgent
challenge to reigning pedagogical and research modalities and outputs in
the university today.
   Whether one is for or against these new developments in university-­
based and university-­adjacent contemporary arts, what is undeniable is
that the discourse surrounding the fine arts PhD and research-­creation in
general is burgeoning. And, as these new practices and programs spread,
debate surrounding them is marked by anxiety and hope: anxiety that the
creation of a new terminal degree will put artists satisfied with the mfa,
as the terminal degree in the field, out of work or demand that they en-


1. dure years of unwanted extra schooling; hope that in these new programs
we will see a kind of training responsive to the needs of those equally
committed to scholarly and artistic practice, and wanting these hybrid
practices to be recognized in a university context. These are hopes and
anxieties that are often placed at odds with each other, as if caring for
one necessitates the obliteration of the other, rather than understanding
these concerns as operating at different registers of practice and analy-
sis for which we must care differentially but equally; these are hopes and
anxieties that become even more marked in the face of increasing budget
cuts to the arts and humanities—that is, to culturally oriented areas of the
university that are undervalued (where steam — a structure including
arts, both fine and liberal — has no place within the dominant ideologies
of stem).18
    As noted above, one of the most common concerns voiced by those
whose dominant identification and professional training is that of “art-
ist” is that faculty initially hired for their artistic excellence — artists who
make and show art in the contemporary art world (museums, galleries,
biennials, and triennials) — in the face of the “research-­creationification”
of university art departments now find themselves “matter out of place”
(Douglas [] ). The fear here is that university art departments
will no longer be understood as sites of proficient “making” but instead
become sites of artistic research vetted solely through humanities and
social science research logics and languages. This is in many ways true.
Studio faculty are often required to ask: How does their (artistic) research
attract and fund graduate students? How does their (artistic) research de-
velop fruitful collaborations within and across departments? How does it
fit strategically into university agendas and national research priorities?
And, for students, rather than (and I am offering a straw-­person narra-
tive here) being trained toward traditional mfa outputs that stake a claim
for an original and talented artistic vision ready for recognition by those
standing at the gates of the art market, they are trained to look toward the
PhD and ask not “What is my vision?” but “How will this artistic output
forward the research question at the heart of my thesis?” This worry is set
up as a structure in which the value of one term (research) will necessarily
eclipse the other (art).
    While this binary structure is one of the things that this book resists, I
understand it all too well. In the art and art history practices within which


              Introduction   I was trained, the artist and artwork have served, more often than not, as
objects for the disciplinary fields of art history, theory, and criticism. It
is historically commonplace for departments of art and art history to be
organized around a model of knowledge production in which philoso-
phy takes charge of and frames art — a hierarchy of knowledge endemic
to the university. George Smith speaks to this point by tracing a history
of philosophical debate surrounding the relation of artistic praxis to epis-
temology, suggesting that “were it to get us finally out from under the
dialectics of knowledge and aesthetics, the philosophical education of the
artist would necessarily entail the philosophy of history, but also the study
of history per se: the history of art, yes; but as importantly, the history of
ideas, the history of science, and the geopolitical history of the State, as
these histories mix with the history of art.... That the philosopher knows
and the artist makes is one rule of specialization on its way out” (, 153;
emphasis added).19
    The way that the arts have historically been devalued in the academy at
large mimics the structural relation of art maker to art thinker in the dis-
cipline of art history itself, which too often presumes that artistic practice,
while it can be seen as a vehicle for research or thinking with the capacity
to seriously impact rather than only express or reflect social experiences
and issues, still fails the benchmark of rigor and accountability to which
academics hold themselves. Historically, within the discipline, the job of
the art historian or theorist or critic has been to step in as that translator
capable of making an argument for the artwork’s greater (historical, po-
litical, social) value. Obviously, this is a culturally and historically specific
caricature, and one that few of my colleagues would recognize themselves
in. But it is one, nonetheless, with ideological staying power, and that I still
have presented to me as a truism by students in both disciplines (studio
art and art history) on a regular basis. It is in the context of such perspec-
tives that research-­creation programs can be seen as particularly potent
locations from which to reassess and reconfigure how we, in the overlap-
ping fields of art, art history, and visual culture, understand our subjects,
objects, and methods of study and publication.
    This conceptualization is particularly relevant at the doctoral level, a
level constitutive of “new knowledge” that is vetted and disseminable and
therefore able to further discourse in a field (or fields). This is because
a research-­creational approach insists that, at the doctoral level, artistic


1. production is no longer solely an object of scholarly inquiry but is itself le-
gitimate form of research and dissemination, which in turn raises questions
regarding the book-­length monograph as the only legitimate product of
a dissertation in the arts and humanities. To state the obvious, how one
does one’s pedagogy in a field impacts what can and is done in that field.
How we train our students to think about their practices impacts how,
and where, and why they move forward toward the futures they are de-
veloping. Learning environments impact the kinds of questions that can
be asked, and the ways in which students are supported in asking them.
As feminist, antiracist, and decolonial theorists have long taught us, peda-
gogical ideologies — regimes of truth — configure the parameters of le-
gitimate research questions as well as what counts as rigor or excellence
for both student and teacher. And, in turn, the ways in which internal
and national granting boards understand the stakes and parameters of
a field, and how these line up with that granting body’s areas of interest
(such as the endowment’s conditions, the university’s mandate, or the na-
tional granting body’s target areas), has everything to do, in the contempo-
rary university (as Howard Singerman powerfully argues in the context
of mfa training in his  Art Subjects: Making Artists in the American
University), with what kind of work is supported, therefore what kind of
work is more likely to be made, seen, acclaimed, and given the chance
to impact others. This is not, as I’ve already stated, to say that research-­
creation cannot be and hasn’t already been, in certain ways, assimilated
by the disciplinary logics of the neoliberal university. It is, instead, to ask
how drawing on earlier, arguably more hopeful, approaches in political art
practice and the interdisciplinary humanities might offer us a roadmap
that can be collaged into an old/new way forward.
    This book is my attempt to do so.
    In what follows, I work with texts that I love, and with my experience of
being disciplined via art history (even as my own formation crosses many
boundaries). This means that my arguments and examples sometimes fail
to fully account for the ways that similar debates have been taken up in al-
lied interdisciplinary nodes in the academy, such as the digital humanities
and design studies, as well as for voices and texts from other cultural, geo-
graphic, or institutional locations. I attempt to flag these other directions
and voices at key moments in the text, and I recognize that the choice to
tell one set of interlocking stories here results in others not being told. All I


              Introduction   can hope is that what is missing does not overshadow what is present, and
that the claims at the heart of this book come across with respect and care.
research-­creation to students pursuing degrees in art and art history. In
this chapter, I am taught by two texts, Donna Haraway’s The Compan-
ion Species Manifesto () and Thomas King’s The Truth about Stories
(). These texts not only tell important, innovative research stories;
they are also about stories — how stories craft and recraft worlds, and
the political importance of participating in such retellings and recraft-
ings. Accordingly, this first chapter offers stories of pedagogy, of art, of
research, and of the intertwined pressures that we face in the neoliberal
university today — pressures that affect not only our capacity to keep up
with ever-­increasing service and administrative loads, but, linked to this,
our very capacity to speculate, dream, and imagine otherwise.21
eage of interdisciplinary interventions in the academy. My primary ar-
gument in this second chapter expands on what I have claimed in this
introduction: that while research-­creation is the result of endogenous
impulses in the world of contemporary research-­based art practice, it is
not just that. Research-­creation is also indebted to a history of academic
interdisciplinarity that includes interventions such as feminist studies,
cultural studies, critical race studies, Indigenous studies, and gender and
sexuality studies — interventions into not only which knowledges might
be deemed valuable, but who might produce such knowledges and how.
In the latter half of the twentieth century, interdisciplinary social justice
and studies-­based programs worked to remake the university, nurturing
pedagogical landscapes within which who was able to research was shown
as central to shifting what research was being done. Indebted to this his-
tory, research-­creation pushes at the limits of how we understand what it
means to “write” and publish — render public — our research.
   If chapters 1 and 2 ground the formal and institutional concerns of the
book, chapter 3, “Polydisciplinamory,” offers the beginning of a theoreti-
cal framework for the research-­creational approach presented thus far.
In it, I argue for the importance of learning to navigate the attachments
that guide a “multiple” approach to research-­creation (multiple in terms
of discipline, method, and form) by drawing on the affective literacies of
theoretical polyamory. Grounded in this literature, I propose the neolo-


1. gism polydisciplinamory as a way to differently structure our negotiations
of the affective attachments needed for a robust practice and theory of
research-­creation. I do so not only through attention to poly lit but also
through psychoanalysis, introducing the Lacanian figure of the sujet sup-
posé savoir as one way to trouble disciplinary relays of knowledge/power
that would say that to be institutionally legible — to be hired, to advance,
to be recognized — we must commit to one disciplinary field, sometimes
dabbling or learning from others, but always in contained ways that re-
turn us to the monogamous hearth and home of our primary disciplinary
spaces. Here, psychoanalytic theory is my friend, helping me to theorize
research-­creation as a method attentive to cathexis and situated curiosity
in ways that necessarily tumble out of the frame of the monodisciplinary.
   Taking up this methodological proposition, chapter 4, “Drive(s),” de-
scribes the Lacanian objet petit a, the “object-­cause of desire,” as a struc-
turing force for the critical discourse of research-­creation. Reading Lacan
idiosyncratically, the objet petit a, in this chapter, becomes a figuration
that helps put desire and drive center stage in the research-­creational
game. It does so in a way that matters as we think about not only what
distinguishes research-­creation but why we might take research-­creation
seriously as one of the forces remaking what we do and how we do it in
the university today. In this chapter I argue that the objet petit a, research-­
creationally speaking, is what we are in the grip of when we find ourselves
pushing our projects into disciplinary and formal directions that we don’t
yet know how to justify. The objet petit a doesn’t describe a curiosity — a
desire — that we mobilize, that we control. It names a curiosity that grasps
us as much if not more than we grasp it, and it is this mode of being driven
by our cathected curiosities that, in this final chapter, I tie back to the
modes of driven curiosity and love described in chapter 1 through Har-
away and King.
   The book then concludes with my own objet petit a. Here I turn to
the question of how to make art at the “end of the world” — a framing
taken from Timothy Morton’s () influential work on what he calls the
hyperobjectivity of global warming. In so doing, I end this manifesto (or
perhaps this is a love story, filled with the ambivalence that constitutes all
stories of love) by situating the work of research-­creation within the con-
text of what is contestedly called the Anthropocene, a term proposed by
Paul Crutzen and Eugene Stoermer in  to name the geologic impact


manifesto on research-­creation as an institutional remaking practice and,
to a lesser degree, a manifesto on mobilizing research-­creation for (and in)
the Anthropocene.
    That is, while the Anthropocene is not its focus, this book emerges
from my thinking about how I do what I do in the university today. And I
cannot think about my daily life in the university without acknowledging
that I write and teach from within Treaty Six territory, a traditional gath-
ering place for diverse Indigenous peoples including the Cree, Blackfoot,
Metis, Nakota Sioux, Iroquois, Dene, Ojibway/Saulteaux/Anishinaabe,
Inuit, and others, roughly three hundred miles south of the Athabasca
oil sands, one of the greatest environmental blights on the planet, during
what are undeniably petrocultural end times. In thus situating myself,
I flag both the historical specificity of the moment at which I write and
the particular pressures of this moment as they manifest themselves in
the northwestern Canadian province where I have found myself living
since.

There is no longer any question that we are living in compromised times,
within which the fantasy of an uncompromised self is isolationist, privi-
leged, and dangerous (Shotwell ). Global ecological and economic
collapse are discussed with alarming regularity in the newspapers and
newsfeeds that surround us, where headlines such as a recent one from
The Atlantic tell us that “a typical person is more than five times as likely
to die in an extinction event as in a car crash” (Meyer ). The arts have
an important and often overlooked part to play in this context. They offer
modes of sensuous, aesthetic attunement, and work as a conduit to focus
attention, elicit public discourse, and shape cultural imaginaries. “How
might the world be organized differently?” is a question that matters ur-
gently, and it is a question that art—particularly art attuned to human and
more-­than-­human social justice — asks in generative and complex ways.
   Oriented by this assertion, I spend most of my time thinking about in-
tersections of art and research as they impact how we do our institutional
and pedagogical work in the university in the context of human-­induced
climate change. That I can do so in the specific ways that I do — research-­
creationally — comes in part from being situated at a university that has




1. come late to the political and institutional work of research-­creation.
When I arrived at the university where I have had the privilege of work-
ing for the past six years, there was very little institutional understanding
of research-­creation. What this means is that I have been able to develop
a research-­creational culture around me that is largely idiosyncratic, one
that emerges from the principles and perspectives that I explore in this
book, and has been largely informed by my students.24
    This matters.
    It changes the contours of what I write in these pages. While I refer to
some colleagues (both within my institution and without), my primary
source of learning, inspiration, and motivation has been the classroom.
It is in the classroom, developing research-­creation streams in art his-
tory courses, developing research-­creation independent studies, seeing
research-­creational master’s theses through from start to finish, and work-
ing with research-­creation PhD students, that I have developed my think-
ing on the topic. It is the work of former and current students that insists
to me that what is happening in the “ivory tower” matters in significant
ways that are not confined, as certain critics might have it, myopically, to
the classroom.
    That said, as is clear by now, a central contention of this book is that
while research-­creation happens in interesting ways outside the univer-
sity, the claiming of doctoral status for such practices offers one of the
most interesting contemporary interdisciplinary provocations to (at least)
the arts and humanities side of the university today. As Derek McCor-
mack writes in his “Thinking-­Spaces for Research-­Creation,” “Research-­
creation is, of necessity, more-­than-­disciplinary” (, 1). Precisely how
this is so is one of the things that this book explores. We already have
excellent research-­based artists in the academy, and if research-­creation
simply renames and rebrands them, then it has already done its funda-
mental job as an organizational category that, while it may still need ad-
ministrative championing, needs no critical discourse. However, if we
understand research-­creation as an approach to bringing academic and
artistic tools together in more-­than-­disciplinary ways that challenge the
current hegemony of the book-­length monograph as the only legitimate
outcome of a PhD in the arts and humanities, then it does, indeed, need
a critical discourse that exceeds the parameters of disciplinary legitima-




           Introduction  tion. This book is a provocation toward just such a critical discourse.
While it takes the form of a traditional book (a form that I genuinely love),
it invites us to think beyond this form, to denaturalize it, and ask ourselves
how we might, each, engage in remaking and reshaping our institutions by
bringing artistic literacies, modes, and approaches to bear on the wicked
problems that surround us — if we are looking — every day.25




. 

           . 



   Stories are much bigger than ideologies. In that is our hope.


   Want a different ethic? Tell a different story.



I N T H E W I N T E R O F 2 0 1 4, I taught a seminar at the University of Alberta
on research-­creation. The seminar, Debates in Art and/as Research, be-
gan with the reading of two texts, neither of which made obvious sense
to my students given the topic, as neither refers explicitly to research-­
creation, nor to arts-­based research, nor, indeed, to “art” very much at all,
but that instead speak to intertwined sites of Indigenous and ecological
genocide: Thomas King’s The Truth about Stories and Donna Haraway’s
The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness.
   The Truth about Stories is a small volume of transcribed lectures by
King, a novelist and broadcaster who was invited, in, to deliver the
annual Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (cbc) Massey Lectures. In
these lectures King speaks to the textures, effects, and logics of colonial
violence, and to the promise of decolonized futures. He does so through
the sharing of stories. Stories that speak to the imbrication of settler-­
colonialism, lived histories of genocide, and the production of the “Native
Other” in the settler-imaginary. They also model the ways that different
languages, different forms, tell different stories and, perhaps more impor-
tantly, tell stories differently.
    Stories are powerful. The stories that we believe, the stories that we live
into shape our daily practices, from moment to moment. They have the
power to promise some futures and conceal others. They encourage us to
see some things and not others. Entrenched stories like “race,” “gender,”
“class,” and “nation” have historically done this very well, prescribing who
might accomplish what, where, when, and how. King underscores this
when he reminds us that “we see race. Never mind that race is a construc-
tion and an illusion. Never mind that it does not exist in either biology or
theology, though both have, from time to time, been enlisted in the cause
of racism. Never mind that we can’t hear it or smell it or taste it or feel it.
The important thing is that we believe we can see it” (, 44).
    To call race a story, however, even when invited by King to do so, may
cause some to pause. Right up front let me assure the reader that I am in
no way suggesting, from my (Euro-­settler) perspective, that race is a story
to be taken lightly, or that the material, historical force of such stories can
be shifted through sheer force of will. To say that stories produce worlds
is not to say that changing stories is an easy practice, nor innocent, nor
always possible. Stories, here, must be understood as productive of and
produced by ideological worldviews with real-­life consequences that, as
Judith Butler (, ), among others, has taught us in the context of
gender-­and sexuality-­based violence, require telling and retelling. The
work of telling new stories, or new versions of stories that need retelling/
recrafting, is propositional; it requires ongoing engagement and a will-
ingness to denaturalize the social, disciplinary, ideological structures
within which we are embedded (to speak parrhesiastically, as Foucault
might have it). King says as much in the afterword to his book, in his
final repetition-­w ith-­a-­difference: “Want a different ethic? Tell a different
story” (1emphasis added).
    Here, stories begin to have a weight they didn’t have before.
    Stories such as race, class, gender, and nation are hegemonic; they
are discursive practices that shape us ideologically and bodily and that
come with violent (although not only violent) effects. And it is for this

    Central to Frayling’s distinctions is the question of what each of these
modes looks like—the form—at the level of a doctoral research thesis.
The first, research into art and design, refers to historical, philosophical,
and/or aesthetic research into an art or design object, period, process, or
issue that generally results in a written doctoral thesis or dissertation; the
second, research through art and design, combines “practical” art or design
production with written analysis relevant to that production, and results in
a hybrid written thesis and artistic object, installation, or action exhibited
and documented in some way; the third, and hands down the most contro-
versial model at the level of doctoral output, is research for art and design.
This final category is “where the thinking is, so to speak, embodied in the
artifact, where the goal is not primarily communicable knowledge in the
sense of verbal communication, but in the sense of visual or iconic or im-
agistic communication” (Frayling, 5; emphasis in original). This last
is the one mode that should not, for Frayling, result in a doctoral research-­
degree: “We do not at present offer research degrees entirely for work
where the art is said to ‘speak for itself.’ Rightly or wrongly, we tend to feel
that the goal here is the art rather than the knowledge or understanding....
And we feel that we don’t want to be in a position that the entire history
of art is eligible for a postgraduate research degree” (5). A quarter century
later, the Royal College of Art (UK) still maintains this distinction.19


and ‘Family Resemblances,’ ” written almost twenty years later, offers dis-
tinctions that echo Frayling’s but that are specific to research-­creation in
Canada. The authors outline four categories for research-­creation and
the funding streams that support and encourage it, and highlight meth-
odological and institutional shifts that they deem crucial for supporting
new hybrid forms of academic production. More theoretically grounded
than Frayling’s, their essay draws on Ludwig Wittgenstein’s notion of fam-
ily resemblances to suggest research-­creational categories that have over-
lapping similarities rather than being firmly delineated. The categories
are research-­for-­creation, research-­from-­creation, creative presentations of
research, and creation-­as-­research.
    Research-­for-­creation names a practice in which research produces a fi-
nal output that takes the form of a non – academically standard object, such
as a website or exhibition, or rapid prototype (Chapman and Sawchuk
,. – 16). The work of the pathbreaking California-­based eco-­artists
Helen and Newton Harrison (– ), with their heavily research-­
based installations visualizing the effects of human-­induced climate
change, may be seen as an example of this. Their work is deeply collab-
orative and based in extensive situated research in different sites, both
geographic and institutional, but the final work is conceived of and circu-
lated as activist artwork.
    For example, their –9 Greenhouse Britain installation, in their
words, “addresses Global Warming from an artist’s perspective. The work
proposes an alternative narrative about how people might withdraw as
waters rise, what new forms of settlement might look like, and what con-
tent or properties a new landscape might have in response to the Global
Warming phenomenon. It also demonstrates how a city might be de-
fended” (Harrison Studio n.d.). In producing this installation, the artists
bring history, ecology, activism, science, and policy together to invite us
to learn from the speculative ways that art can imagine otherwise. And
they do so as research-­based eco-­art activists. They model what art in
the ever-­expanded field can do as art. The art world is their (inter)disci-
plinary home, and, like Kelly (as discussed in chapter 1), this is how they
understand their work.
    Research-­from-­creation names an approach in which creative practices
and processes are used to generate new understanding that results in pri-


Discipline(s)marily written output — a monograph or journal article (Chapman and
Sawchuk,. – 18). A generative example of this is Lianne McTavish’s
Feminist Figure Girl. Between  and, McTavish, a visual cultural
theorist specializing in the early modern history of the body, trained to
perform in a figure girl (bodybuilding) contest, all the while engaging in
autoethnographic reflection and feminist analysis on her blog. The proj-
ect, part feminist autoethnography and part daily-­practice performance
intervention, involved McTavish, a tenured professor then in her mid-­
forties, making public the labor involved in the training she was engaged
in, melding it seamlessly with feminist theoretical reflection, and render-
ing it visible as an intervention into normative academic labor. “I was,”
writes McTavish, “deliberately pursuing what was, for me, a new way of
creating new knowledge” (quoted in Harvey ). This new way of creat-
ing knowledge, however, was one in which the training and performance
practice held secondary status. Like Myers’s “Anthropologist as Trans-
ducer in a Field of Affects,” the performance-­based aspects of the work
were rendered not as primary academic outputs but as experimental, em-
bodied research methods, here resulting in a single-­authored monograph
(Feminist Figure Girl, published in  by suny Press).
    Creative presentations of research, Chapman and Sawchuk’s third cat-
egory, references a now lengthy history of experimental academic prac-
tices, such as performative writing, anecdotal theorizing, autoethnog-
raphy, and poststructuralist literary interventions that mobilize poetic
and experimental form, as well as hypertextual writings (,. – 19).
Here the distinction is writerly vocality, and the focus is on the imbrica-
tion of writerly form and content. Jacques Derrida’s poetic Glas ()
easily represents this category, as do Chapman and Sawchuk’s primary
examples, which include: “Walter Benjamin’s () innovative use of the
allegory and the structure of the ‘theses’ in writings such as ‘Theses on
the Philosophy of History,’ Marshall McLuhan’s () experiment with
typography in Counterblast..., Donna Haraway’s () remixing of the
manifesto, and Roland Barthes’ () deployment of the alphabet as a
template for an examination of the discourse on love all [of which] indi-
cate that academics have long-­experimented with writing that challenges
the logico-­deductive or analytic forms of argumentation or presentation”
(6). This category learns from the intersection of literary and continental




5. philosophical theory linked to the post-­ version of the interdisciplin-
ary humanities, and understands such formal interventions into textual
vocality as key to research-­creation.
    Creation-­as-­research, Chapman and Sawchuk’s final category, presented
as their most “complex” and “controversial” (19), functions, in turn, as a
kind of metacategory—one that is exemplary of research-­creation both
at its strongest and at its most difficult . – 20). Unlike her “Anthropolo-
gist as Transducer in a Field of Affects,” Myers’s Becoming Sensor in Sen-
tient Worlds ( – present), a collaboration with dancer and filmmaker
Ayelen Liberona sited equally between art, multispecies anthropology,
ecology, and feminist science studies fulfills the criteria for Chapman and
Sawchuk’s final category. Asking “what would you change if you knew
that the trees were watching you?,” Becoming Sensor works to, in the au-
thors’s idiom, “detune the colonial sensorium,” tracking the naturecultural
pasts and presents of the oak savannahs in Toronto’s High Park. Rather
than being art, or anthropology, or theory, or criticism, or history, Becom-
ing Sensor is all of the above, improperly, partially, and interconnectedly.
It takes the form of experimental photographic and sound documents,
drawing, academic essays, historical and situated narrative, and Fluxus
conceptual art – like invitations (framed as “protocols for an un-­gridable
ecology”). These invitations to join Myers and Liberona in reattuning
ourselves locally, sensorially, and politically, draw on (among others)
the sound art language of attunement, the dancerly language of kines-
thetics, the performance art framework of the happening, an anticolonial
politics informed by scholars of Indigenous futurities, and a robust more-­
than-­human orientation informed by scholars such as Haraway, Isabelle
Stengers, and Vinciane Despret.
    Understood as distributed across all of its constituent parts, Becoming
Sensor challenges the notion of these categories as discrete in a way that is
incoherent with Frayling’s categories (into, through, and for) but that fits
well with Chapman and Sawchuk’s. As noted above, in the Frayling the
general distinctions “art,” “design,” and “research” emerge in the context
of higher education funding and practices relevant to the fine arts in the
UK in the early s. His propositional categories, for, into, and through,
neatly divide those writing an all-­dissertation PhD, from those doing
a half art-­or-­design-­practice/half substantial-­a nd-­l inked-­a nalytical-­text




  Discipline(s) PhD, from those who are focused on the art or design object as primary
output adequate to the professional art and design markets. Chapman and
Sawchuk, not interested in policing boundaries but in describing poten-
tialities and trajectories, offer, instead, “valences” for research creation,
with research-­creation understood “not as a thing, but as a concept with
blurred boundaries” (— something closer to my invocation, above, of
Bowker and Star’s uncanny boundary objects. It is for this reason that, de-
pending on what I am arguing for and when, I might (still with Krauss in
my ears) read Beatriz da Costa’s Pigeonblog as hovering between research-­
for-­creation and creation-­as-­research, or McTavish’s Feminist Figure Girl
as both research-­from-­creation and a creative presentation of research.
These valences are situated and performative, not constative (Austin
). They matter as sites of friction and debate that refuse (to recall
Readings [, 176], above) “to let the question of disciplinarity disap-
pear, sink into routine.”
    While research-­for-­creation is most likely to produce an art or design
object as the outcome of an extensive research process, research-­from-­
creation a written text that is grounded in artistic experimentation, and
creative presentations of research a monograph or essay, in text or hyper-
text, that plays significantly and poetically with the relation of form to
meaning, it is their final category, creation-­as-­research—as Chapman and
Sawchuk make clear in their  follow up to the initial essay (“Creation-­
as-­Research: Critical Making in Complex Environments”) — that speaks
most powerfully to research-­creation as a unique contribution to the con-
temporary university landscape. What implicitly distinguishes this last
category is that it requires multimodality; it requires that more than one of the
previous categories be mobilized in service of the project. Research-­creation,
on this reading, is designed to produce polymaths skilled at working in
multiple modalities, not just vocalities. It produces hybrid forms, defamil-
iarizing and uncanny, that oscillate between more than one “species” of
production and that result in “offspring” that are often unthinkable, illeg-
ible within the current institutional frameworks of academia. It creates a
chimera.
    By bringing research and creation together in such a way that they un-
predictably contaminate and remake each other, in such a way that they
render each other uncanny, research-­creation makes space in the univer-




sity for research practices that are grounded in nonhegemonic literacies,
thereby challenging the naturalized assumption, in arts, humanities, and
social science scholarly cultures, that the book-­length monograph or peer-­
reviewed academic essay is the only valid — or only “top-­tier” — means
of research communication output; it also challenges perspectives that
would argue for artistic production as de facto research. Practically speak-
ing, research-­creation pushes at the limits of traditional academic outputs
and traditional artistic outputs; it is productive of work that, more often
than not, fails to fully register on either scholarly academic or art-­world
exhibition fronts. In doing so, in failing to fully belong, and allowing that
nonbelonging to denaturalize, emergently, its givens, research-­creation
tells other stories, uncanny stories, that (have the potential to) carry within
them the other ethics that King invites us to attend to.
    Here, taking King’s invitation to heart, we must understand research-­
creation not only as a logical extension of post-­ interdisciplinary and
theoretical interventions into the academy, but as specifically indebted to
feminist, queer, decolonial, and other social justice movements, as they
have worked to remake the academy from within. Research-­creation
works in alliance with antiracist and feminist interventions that would
ask us to pay attention not only to who gets to participate and whose labor
gets to count but also which modes of address are permitted scholarly sta-
tus. It recalls feminist, queer, and decolonial claims for the personal as
not only political but relevant to (and constitutive of) scholarship. In this
context, research-­creation challenges reigning academic cultures less by
asserting a new, disciplined and disciplining, academic identity, a noun
(the artist-­researcher), than by offering us something verbified and ver-
tiginous, something that queers normative university discourse, propa-
gating uncanny academic kinship structures and unexpected disciplinary
intimacies and alliances.
    Informed by the uncanny, this critical understanding insists that the
question of where and when research-­creation functions as noun (a site of
attachment) or verb (a site of movement or undoing) remains open. It re-
quires that one cultivate a robust capacity to follow curiosity and sit with
anxiety. And it requires that one navigate multiple pulls across disciplin-
ary sites, methodological approaches, and formal requirements. Which
leads me to the following questions: If such experimental multimodal-




              Discipline(s)ity is crucial to research-­creation, how do we — ethically — manage these
multiple pulls? How do we do the work of stretching across, and moving
between, more than one disciplinary, methodological, epistemological,
affective, etc., set of differences, needs, and demands? How do we deal,
to return to the eros that dogged Haraway’s text in chapter 1, with the de-
mands of multiple sites of attachment, of multiple loves. 
  Polydisciplinamory



   These manoeuvres, particularly between art and philosophy, make me feel like
   an adulterous spouse. Each field demands my full energy, attention, and commit-
   ment; each resents my involvement with the other; each suspects such involve-
   ment when I am absent; each feels personally betrayed when this suspicion is
   confirmed; and each is absolutely and unconditionally unwilling to concede any
   legitimacy to that involvement, much less make any accommodation to it. Each
   field is morally outraged by the suggestion that I am a resource that might be
   shared with the other, to the ultimate advantage of both.



I N T H E E P I G R A P H A B O V E, artist and philosopher Adrian Piper describes
her experience of being an interdisciplinary practitioner, using the lan-
guage of marital monogamy to describe what it feels like to be pulled in
more than one disciplinary direction within a system that is governed by
monodisciplinary logics. Thus far, as I have framed it, a central function
of research-­creation, prior even to its content(s), is to mark the practice of
thinking-­with as a multiple and productively discordant one in which the
partnerships (disciplines, forms) at stake are always already, uncannily,
in question. Because of this, research-­creation works as a potent interven-
tion into university norms, one that, in this chapter, I want to suggest as
polydisciplinary, or, rather, as polydiscipline-­amorous.
    The neologism polydisciplinamory takes interdisciplinarity’s transgres-
sive charge (to always be pushing at, and defamiliarizing, the limits of
disciplinary boundaries) and brings it together with the insights of theo-
retical polyamory. Specifically, it learns from queer theory’s contribution
to critical pedagogy (Berlant and Warner ; Britzman ; Halperin
; Luhmann ; Pinar ), and adds to it polyamory’s critiques
of mononormativity as a way to reconfigure, and deepen, the previous
chapter’s critique of disciplinary specialization. While the displacing
structures of the uncanny and the denaturalizing of disciplinary givens
matter for research-­creation, it is the love and driven curiosity at stake in a
research-­creational orientation that this chapter returns to and deepens
by attending to the structure of theoretical polyamory.
    Unlike the queer, until recently the polyamorous has flown under the
radar in most academic circles (Sheff ). This is perhaps because lit-
erature on polyamory has most often taken the form of practical guides
such as Dossie Easton and Janet Hardy’s  The Ethical Slut: A Guide to
Infinite Sexual Possibilities (reprinted in ) and Tristan Taormino’s 
Opening Up: A Guide to Creating and Sustaining Open Relationships, both
well-­circulated “how-­tos” detailing the successful—ethical—negotiation
of multiple emotional and sexual partners. Since the early s, however,
a growing body of literature, largely from political and sociological sexu­
ality studies, and more recently from Indigenous and feminist science
studies, has begun to emerge.2
    While attentive to this literature, what follows is not an attempt to say
everything about the state of polyamory (nor nonmonogamy) in theory,
practice, or history. Rather, in writing this chapter, I am assuming that
decades of queer practice and theory, within the art-­academic circles to
which I address myself, have led us to a place from which we can assume
a rich understanding of nonmonogamy in all its many forms. From here,
I turn to the relatively new field of theoretical, or critical, polyamory to
challenge monodisciplinary legacies and methods, drawing on a long his-
tory of queer pedagogical thinking to help open up a space from which to
conceive research-­creation as polydisciplinamorous.3
    The concept of the queer as that which challenges normative identity-­


political frameworks has been a commonplace (and contested) part of the
theoretical landscape of gender and sexuality studies, since, at least, the
term queer theory was coined in  by Teresa de Lauretis (; see also
Butler, Halperin, and Sedgwick ). Drawing on this history
in a  essay titled “Theoretical Polyamory: Some Thoughts on Loving,
Thinking, and Queering Anarchism,” political theorists Deric Shannon
and Abbey Willis argue for theoretical polyamory —like queer theory be-
fore it — not only as a sexual practice, one that challenges traditional mo-
nogamous frameworks, but also as a strategic theoretical metaphor. They
suggest theoretical polyamory as a way of “drawing connections between
the ways that we love and the ways that we think. Perhaps in the end,” they
continue, “this means... an embrace of a political anti-­identity in much
the same way ‘queer’ was meant as an answer... to questions about gender
and sexual identity” (, 440).
    In this invocation of the queer, Shannon and Willis draw primarily on
gender and sexuality studies scholar David Halperin, who writes that the
queer “is by definition whatever is at odds with the normal, the legitimate,
the dominant. There is nothing in particular to which it necessarily refers.
It is an identity without essence. ‘Queer’ then, demarcates not a positivity
but a positionality vis-­à-­v is the normative” (, emphasis added). In
this same vein, literary theorist Lee Edelman characterizes the queer of
queer theory thus: “Fluid, contextual, resistant to every attempted sub-
stantialization, queerness is situational but never positivized as an attri-
bute, never fixed, that is, as a stable term that results in a coherent perspec-
tive.... As permanent eruption of a non-­relation, of an unintelligibility,
as the signifier of social non-­closure, the empty signifier of that founding
exclusion through which the social posits itself, queerness denotes the set
of those things that stymie categorization, that impossible set of elements
always external to any set, the paradox of particularity in the absence of
specification” (, emphasis added).
    The queer, here, undoes; it disrupts; it challenges norms; it is always on
the move. It is, as Halperin frames it (drawing on Foucault), a positional-
ity (a verb), and never a positivity (a noun) — what the previous chapter
framed as an act rather than an essence. It is, in Edelman’s terms (draw-
ing on Lacan), situational but never positivized. The queer, thus figured,
demands that the work of queerness, of being queer, of doing queerness,
remain always already unfinished; in other words, as a political project,


       Polydisciplinamory    queer theory remains always in play, never done — an always already de-
stabilized and destabilizing force.5
    Because theoretical polyamory is that branch of the queer that insists
on nonmonogamy as its constitutive tether, however, it pushes the bal-
ance of analysis from a critique of compulsory heterosexuality (Rich )
to one of compulsory monogamy, with the latter’s structural dependence
on the inequality of the heteronormative couple, and the couple form it-
self, as its analytic thrust. In other words (and stated a little more strongly
than I think is, indeed, the case, but in a way that is nonetheless useful
for distinction’s sake), if hetero-­and homosexuality are about who one
loves and fucks, mono-­and polyamory are about how one loves and fucks.6
Through this subtle shift, theoretical polyamory brings attention to affec-
tive and kinship ties that are responsive to the polymorphous nature of
desire not only in its (diachronic, metonymic) mode of undoing but also
and unpredictably in its (synchronic, metaphoric) modes of attachment.7
While queer theory commonly asserts that it is the queering, the undoing
of (sexual/disciplinary) norms, that is at stake, the theoretically polyam-
orous steps in, in its wake, to invite us to develop and nurture attachment
across multiple (sexual/social/disciplinary) sites.
    It is important to note, here, that, within poly lit, not all heterosexuali-
ties or even monogamies are figured as equal. Compulsory monogamous
heterosexuality, with traditional marriage as its exemplar, is understood
as a system based on exclusion (Rubin ), and, as such, is at the top of
that hierarchy of social legitimation that depends on a belief in monoga-
mous heterosexual being — itself at the heart of inherited modern, West-
ern conceptions of what is natural, right, and that marks the norm from
which other practices, even when accepted rather than punished, devi-
ate. Polyamorous practices, in contrast, allow for heterosexual and even
monogamous acts while rejecting the imperative of what we might cum-
bersomely call repro-­mono-­hetero-­normativity. In the words of cultural
theorist Laura Portwood-­Stacer, queer polyamory “is less an objection
to heterosexual desire and more an objection to the idea that heterosex-
uality is normal, natural, and morally superior to other sexual arrange-
ments.... [It] is less about advocating for particular sexual desires (for
multiple partners, say) than it is about a radical commitment to people’s
freedom to determine the nature of their own sexual practice, without
coercion by the market or the state” (, . – 84).


6. characterization, while a seductive rallying cry reminiscent of the so-­
called sexual revolution of the s, is a sticking point for contempo-
rary poly theorists, including Portwood-­Stacer herself, who challenge the
presumed white-­middle-­class-­and-­able (in every sense of the term) pre-
sumptions that are often naturalized by freedom as a rhetorical descriptor
(Klesse b; Noel ; Portwood-­Stacer ; Willey ). Critical
of the volitional rhetoric of individual choice and personal agency that
abounds in many poly texts, Portwood-­Stacer qualifies the quote above
by writing that the “literature that circulates within the popular poly-
amory movement promotes polyamory as a kind of self-­help, a change
in lifestyle that anyone might make. It fails to take into account the sys-
tems of domination that enforce hegemonic norms, particularly where
those systems exert unequal pressure on different kinds of bodies” (,
485). Rather than uncritically embracing polyamory in practice or theory,
Portwood-­Stacer insists on the importance of challenging mainstream
characterizations of liberal polyamory that ignore the systemic barriers
that maintain the political and social agency of some bodies but not oth-
ers, and invites us to think critically not only about the mononormative
given that we can only be legitimately, legally, sexually, emotionally com-
mitted to one person at a time, but about the heteropatriarchal-­colonial
ideologies that often subtend that assumption. Attending to the ways that
sexual subjectivities are too often made through denials that are histori-
cally and politically constituted, she works to denaturalize the hegemony
of the couple form by developing critiques of compulsory mononormativ-
ity and its modern, heteropatriarchal, settler-­colonial agent, the nuclear
family (Barker ; Klesse b; Morgensen ; TallBear ).8
    Read in this way, theoretical polyamory informs and re-­forms the ap-
proach to interdisciplinarity — the organizations of knowledge, attention
to hegemonic power structures, and intergenerational reproductions —
demanded by research-­creation as it has been figured over the past two
chapters. Traditional interdisciplinarity, with its intertheory thrust,
could be said to be about who (which disciplines) one commits to, while
research-­creation, as a polydisciplinamorous orientation, becomes about
how one commits to producing new kinship ties not only in terms of con-
tent (the “who”) but in terms of form (the “how”). Taught by the poly lit
detailed above, polydisciplinamory argues that not all disciplinarities are


   Polydisciplinamory  equal: it sees monogamous disciplinarity as a structure of relating based
on exclusion and a polydisciplinamorous one as allowing for disciplinary
acts while rejecting the imperative of monodisciplinarity as the only site
of rigorous legitimacy. It also, importantly, recognizes that not everyone
has the privilege to choose to inhabit the university in these ways. In fact,
most don’t. Due to hostile departmental conditions or the need to be leg-
ible when going up for advancement and promotion, it is incumbent on
those of us who have tenure, research chair positions, research centers,
and grants to create conditions of greater possibility and flourishing for
our students and our colleagues, whenever and wherever possible, with-
out misrecognizing our privilege as a right that anyone can wield. It re-
quires us to speak truth to power, in power, and with power.

Having set up polyamory as a structure to think with when theorizing
research-­creation as interdisciplinary praxis, I want to now interrogate
one of its axioms, enlisting psychoanalysis to help us complicate things
(as psychoanalysis is wont to do), but also to render things more interest-
ing and useful for the project of research-­creationalizing the university.
   As anyone who has inhabited polyamorous and ethically nonmonoga-
mous circles knows, honesty is one of its central axes of power. Polyamory
and ethical nonmonogamy are distinguished from other forms of nonmo-
nogamy on the basis of an “ethical responsibility” grounded in honesty
and consensus — in “truth.” In popular as well as some critical literature
on the subject, “uncommitted” or “unethical” nonmonogamy, which in
the language of interdisciplinarity would be something like “disciplinary
dabbling,” is understood as focusing on sex and a lack of commitment to
doing the work of honest and ongoing communication, while “committed”
or “ethical” nonmonogamy or polyamory is characterized by situation-
ally negotiated, multiple kinship nodes involving sexual and emotional
intimacy. grounded in the premise of and promise of radical (emergent)
honesty.
   If we return to Bowker and Star’s characterization of the boundary ob-
ject from chapter 1 in the context of this discussion of polyamory, it reads
quite interestingly. Bowker and Star state that a boundary object is an
object that can “inhabit several communities of practice and satisfy the
informational requirements of each of them. Boundary objects are thus
both plastic enough to adapt to the local needs and constraints of the sev-


6. eral parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a common
identity across sites” (, 297). Changing the focus, within the quota-
tion, from informational to affective requirements may help us think about
this aspect of theoretical or critical polyamory in a new light. A polyam-
orous approach, read this way, allows one to “inhabit several communi-
ties of practice and satisfy the [affective/sexual] requirements of each of
them. [Poly(discipline)amorous practice is] thus both plastic enough to
adapt to local needs and constraints of the several parties employing them
[relationship partners], yet robust enough to maintain a common identity
across sites” — with this robustness seen as the direct result of the honesty
invoked above, given that having multiple intimate relationships, be they
sexual or not, without the knowledge of all partners involved does not al-
low for a “common identity across sites.”
   Honesty is thus underscored as the sine qua non of ethical polyamory.
The stance can be caricatured as such: in polyamory and ethical non-
monogamy, multiple and differential (and often unpredictable) modes of
relating across genders and sexualities are encouraged, with the caveat
that all parties commit to a form of radical honesty with each other and
agree on the rules of engagement. Too often, however, in much of the lit-
erature, the poly imperative to know thyself (the axiom of honesty within
polyamory) emerges as a particular type of knowing that doesn’t have to
account for intersectional and historical injustices, or material and emo-
tional inequalities. Nor, I hasten to add, for the eruptions of the psycho-
analytic unconscious.
   Relevant here is literary theorist Jane Gallop’s  Anecdotal Theory.
A collection of essays describing the author’s contribution to feminist
psychoanalytic and deconstructive thinking, the volume powerfully re-
figures the feminist adage “the personal is political,” asking what taking
psychoanalysis seriously (and deconstruction, though here I focus on the
former) does to our understanding of the political work of the personal
within academic spaces. Specifically, Gallop asks how a theory of the un-
conscious (Freud) and the Real (Lacan) reorients the meaning of the per-
sonal within the political.
   In order to do this, she proposes that we look to the structure of “an-
ecdote,” as a specific storytelling form. Gallop claims anecdote as a form
that erupts into our (feminist, antiracist) scenes of scholarship, refiguring
inherited modes of scholarly authority and vocality, leaving us a little un-


     Polydisciplinamory   sure as to when and where we have become too personal, and when and
where it is precisely this grounding in the personal that is making our po-
litical scholarship, our theory, possible. To take anecdote as a storytelling
practice seriously, as a way of acknowledging the webs of indebtedness
that are constitutive of and give rise to any academic life, is first to anchor
one’s theory within the unpredictable affective terrain of daily life. In addi-
tion to paying attention to the grain of everyday life—university or other-
wise—to work with anecdote is, however, for Gallop, given her psychoana-
lytic bases, to also acknowledge the generative power of the unconscious. In
other words, to take anecdote seriously is not simply to suggest that it is out
of the warp and weft of the everyday that we make our theory as feminist
researchers. Nor is it simply to suggest that part of taking feminist anti-
racist challenges to the academy seriously is to wedge open a space of ac-
countability for the private within the public as well as the personal within
the political. While Gallop’s project does, indeed, support such assertions,
it ties these to the psychoanalytic insight that, given the structuring power
of the unconscious, one never knows (fully) from where one speaks, and also
that one always speaks more than what one intends.
     To return to the axiom of honesty, then, what might it mean to be “hon-
est” in the context of an unconscious in which one never knows (fully)
from where one speaks? My suggestion is this: if we take psychoanalysis
seriously, the honesty at stake must be understood as split, based both on
a capacity to be honest and clear about the manifest content of given rela-
tionships while also being willing to be accountable to the latent content of
relationships that emerge unexpectedly in unpredicted (affective/erotic)
encounters. Such an approach lays the ground for a polyamorous model
of accountability that is multiply responsive and response-­able (Haraway
), but that needs a few more tools in its toolkit to effectively do its
work. It requires tools that help us nurture not only a willingness to be
accountable for our positionalities, affective attachments, and concrete
choices in any and all love (and research) stories—that is, accountable
for where and how and with whom we do our (disciplinary) coupling and
uncoupling—but also a willingness to take seriously the eruptions and
drives that can seem to take all volition off the table and render us fol-
lowers, in much the same way that sexual desire can ignite one’s attention
forcefully and unpredictably in directions one never thought one would go.
     There is one final psychoanalytic distinction that I would like to enlist,


here, for the project of research-­creation as polydisciplinamorous praxis,
and that is the Lacanian figure of the sujet supposé savoir. The analytic (and
pedagogical) ethics mobilized by the sujet supposé savoir describes a way
to negotiate polyamory’s axiom of honesty, but from a psychoanalytic per-
spective that works with the unpredictable eruptions of the unconscious
and that recognizes the pull of desire as a crucial and mobilizing one, even
and especially when it grabs one unexpectedly. The sujet supposé savoir,
taken in this way, teaches us from where to take our bearings, polydisciplin-
amorously speaking.
    What do I mean by this? A term most often translated as the “subject
presumed to know,” the sujet supposé savoir names the structure that, for
Lacan, organizes our unconscious desire within the analytic and peda-
gogical scenes. It is a way of talking about projections of power onto cer-
tain types of figures, such as the analyst, or the teacher, doctor, or parent in
childhood. Although psychoanalysis teaches us that, to a certain degree,
any subject can inhabit, for another subject, the position of the sujet sup-
posé savoir, the exemplar of this is the analyst in the therapeutic situation—
that situation that has been famously characterized as the “talking cure”
(Freud [] ).
    There are a number of projections mobilized by the sujet that mat-
ter here. First, there is the projection from the analysand onto the ana-
lyst (or the student onto the teacher, or the junior faculty onto the star
scholar). This projection imbues the analyst or anyone inhabiting the
position of the sujet supposé savoir with the power of the one who knows,
and whose knowledge we desire (the Other in the other). While, to begin
with (through the transference that ignites the process), we are driven to
invest in this person-­w ith-­k nowledge/power, the aim of analysis is to work
through that projection in such a way as to lead to the realization that the
sujet does not, in fact, possess the capital-­“T” Truth (that kernel of knowl-
edge/power that we so desired). Instead, if the sujet is doing their job well
within this dynamic, they know, and we come to know, that the power
we ascribed to them is structural. They wield it by dint of the position
they hold (analyst/teacher/discipline) and not through any innate qual-
ity (though this is not to say that all teachers and analysts are equal and
that it is only structure that is at work here). In other words, while we may
indeed love something (a human, a dog, a disciplinary form), that love is
also, always, a love of what they represent for us even before we know it.12


       Polydisciplinamory   the discipline, the practice), in order for the investment that would lure
one forward enough to care to commence, in order for curiosity (in its
ethico-­erotic form) to be ignited. This is how things start. But it is not how
things end. When it comes to the position of the teacher or the analyst, the
psychoanalytic insight here is that the sujet supposé savoir, as a function,
must not be misrecognized, either by the one inhabiting its position or the
one investing in that position, as an ontological truth (as the actual object
of love). Rather, it must be recognized as a structural truth, one that, while
tied to an individual body, has everything to do with the function they are
performing within the scene of exchange.
    While this “deposition” is in itself important, it is crucial that the route
to this realization —the realization that the sujet supposé savoir is a struc-
tural position (an act) rather than an innate quality (an essence) — is a
fully invested one, characterized by erotic drive and love (what Freud and
Lacan call transference love). Investment in the sujet supposé savoir is
necessary, in the analytic situation as in the pedagogical one. One must
cathect for the process to even start. Understood this way, the sujet sup-
posé savoir is a lure, a powerful lure that must be deposed in the end, but
that is structurally needed as an attractor inaugurating the love and cu-
riosity needed for the journey (the working-through) to begin. In this
context, the teacher, while they come to the classroom with knowledge,
is not there only to teach that manifest content. They are there to do that
but, also, they are there to model a structural relation to knowledge—
a structural relation to knowledge that has everything to do with the ne-
gotiations of power and authority that make up disciplinary, interdisci-
plinary, and polydisciplinary thinking, and that recognizes that each of
these ways of doing the disciplinary (mono/inter/poly) is about doing au-
thority and power differently.
    In her  Reading Lacan, Gallop frames it thus: When it comes to
the sujet supposé savoir, “one can effectively undo authority only from
the position of authority in a way that exposes the illusions of that position
without renouncing it, so as to permeate the position itself with the con-
notations of its illusoriness, so as to show that everyone, including the
sujet supposé savoir, is castrated” (14). Here, the source and plenitude of
knowledge (its origin) is not seen as located in the sujet, but rather as pro-
duced through an acknowledged asymmetrical relation of power within



the scene, as well as a willingness to invest in this asymmetry. Whether in the
analytic or pedagogical scene, for Gallop as for Lacan, there is no vantage
point outside of the specific structure of love that is transference — one
can interpret the transference, work with it, but not escape it. One must,
to return to the Harawayan framework of chapter 1, stay with the trouble.
    To take seriously the theoretical structure of the sujet supposé savoir,
then, is to flag the crucial point that within the psychoanalytic knowledge
economy we are always already subjected, given, and driven. The task is
to work noninnocently from within, and nurture the nodes of curiosity
necessary for any truly pedagogical research practice to develop. It is to
allow ourselves to be driven toward those locations and people and disci-
plines that seem to hold what we desire, knowing that what we desire will,
however, always exceed anything that we find there.
    This attention to the working-through of transference and counter-
transference in the scene of knowledge is what distinguishes the sujet
supposé savoir misrecognized as substance from the sujet supposé savoir
recognized as a structurally endowed position that, when not misrecog-
nized, provides the ethical fulcrum of the pedagogical/disciplinary scene.
It demands that the cathected, situated, and relational be valued rather
than disavowed; it requires this, hand in glove with a deep attentiveness to
divisions of labor, hierarchies of value, and canonizations of knowledge.
Here, the structure of the sujet supposé savoir, as an ethical organization
of that erotic kernel that lures us forward and makes shit happen, pedagogi-
cally speaking, is key to the kind of polydisciplinamorous relations I look
to research-­creation to nurture.
    Research-­creation, as mobilized thus far, invites an other mode of ac-
countability. It demands that the eros of Haraway’s dog, the amory of
multiple-­disciplinary-­loves, and the negotiations that these demand, be
placed front and center in our pedagogical worlds. The neologism poly-
disciplinamor. aims not only at the invocation of multiplicity that poly-
disciplinary study offers, but also at holding space for amory in both the
sense of psychoanalytic libidinal cathexis and transference love (the sup-
position of desired/desirable knowledge to an other). It asks how the per-
spectives mobilized under the sign of polyamory offer a way to ground the
love-­of-­k nowledge that animates the relation marked by the sujet supposé
savoir, unpinning our allegiance to discipline, and replacing an Imagi-
nary relation to knowledge (the fullness of content) with a psychoana-


      Polydisciplinamory   lytically ethical one attentive both to the desire that emerges at the site of
the sujet supposé savoir, and to the drive I have been naming curiosity, a
drive that erupts and takes us over. Here, polydisciplinamory, as a kind of
eros-­driven-­curiosity, becomes an organizational principle for research-­
creation, one that helps tutor us in managing the frictions, dissonances,
and different demands required by not only more than one discipline but
more than one form, and to recognize these negotiations as always already
imbricated in structures of power.
    Research-­creation, understood in this way, is a practice of love. It is
an erotic, driven, invested practice. And, as such, it fails to fit into those
models that see interdisciplinarity as a way to streamline and multiply
research productivities. It is too disruptive for that. Research-­creation fol-
lows desire, and builds spaces and contexts that allow the time and space
to experiment in unpredictable directions.
    This is not to say that research-­creation cannot collaborate with and
is not regularly assimilated within the disciplinary frames that configure
normative university life; it is to say that research-­creation — at its most
innovative — is dissonant, failing to fully cohere or belong, calling the
interdisciplinary into question as thoroughly as the disciplinary, and at-
tempting to open up the playing field of disciplinary knowledge produc-
tion to its polymorphous potential. Rejecting the logic of reproductive fu-
turity (Edelman ), research-creation suggests a mode of knowledge
production that does more than simply contribute to existing realms of
interdisciplinary and disciplinary data. Instead, without eschewing the
asymmetries of hierarchical disciplinary differences, it tumbles outside
of these intellectual frameworks, challenging practice/theory divides as
they police what gets to count as a valid object and method, within which
disciplinary framework, where, when, and how.
    In the pedagogical encounter, who and how I am, as both teacher and
student, demands always asking why: Why is one interested in what one
is interested in? What worldview is one inhabiting with one’s research ob-
jects, forms, and practices? Taking ignorance and curiosity as our guides,
we ask: What do I not know here? To what am I not attending? What is
drawing me forward, and why?
    How we do, think about, think-­with our research practices — be they
written, spoken, or danced — matters. In true poly form, what matters is
our willingness to engage the multiple ways in which this “making” is a


fundamentally situated, relational construct. It is one that entangles us
in relations of debt in ways for which we can never fully account, despite
always being willing to be (emergently) accountable.
    In my teaching practice, I have found polydisciplinamory an incred-
ibly fruitful way to reframe the now normative interdisciplinarity de-
bates within the academy as described in previous chapters. Research-­
creation, understood polydisciplinamorously, brings eros back into the
grain of our pedagogical everyday, opening us up to the question of who,
disciplinarily speaking, we will fall for, as well as how we fall and when.
If rampant disciplinary promiscuity demands no commitment (welcom-
ing one-­night stands), polydisciplinamory, while in some senses promis-
cuous, does something different: it asks that multiple and simultaneous
committed loves, at multiple levels — manifest and latent, conscious and
unconscious — be taken seriously. Linking promiscuous curiosity with
the mixing and mingling of disciplinary frames, research-­creation takes
the polydisciplinamorous as its particular charge, as opposed to the se-
rial monogamy or polyfidelity of inter-­ and multidisciplinarity, failing to
understand those disciplinary modes of filiality that structure the field-­
based conversations that, in turn, organize the space that we call the uni-
versity today.
    Toronto-­based artists Deirdre Logue and Allyson Mitchell’s  single-­
channel video Hers Is Still a Dank Cave: Crawling Toward a Queer Horizon
offers a humorous and curious example of just such an approach: an emer-
gent, responsive, undutiful, nonfilial research practice that follows one’s
situated loves and curiosities in a polydisciplinamorous mode, mixing the
rules of avant-­garde video with academic interrogation, and keeping both
in antinomic tension through the sophisticated use of humor (indeed,
in a contemporary queer idiom it recalls Mary Kelly’s groundbreaking
Post-­Partum Document in its complex interweaving of theory and daily-­
practice). Their single-­channel video starts with a domestic scene: one of
the artists washing dishes in (presumably) their kitchen. This static shot
lasts for forty-­three seconds. After which the artists’ domestic space is
replaced by... a singing rock.
    Immediately the tone for their research-­creationally inclined video es-
say is set: the mundane juxtaposed with the absurd. To multiply this ab-
surdity even further, the text being sung (and that runs along the bottom
of the screen, karaoke style) is academic: “Artists use research method. 
that a reader trained in traditional quantitative and qualitative scholarly
research methods may not understand,” the rock sings. The text comes
from Brad Haseman’s “A Manifesto for Performative Research”. 
Intercut with scenes of dishwashing, the song continues: “Practice-­based
research is designed for those who wish to initiate and pursue their re-
search through practice, and for those seeking new research paradigms.”
The intercutting of animated objects singing academic metareflection
on “performative research” with domestic scenes of the artists in their
home immediately reminds the informed viewer of the decades of art/life
intervention — feminist, queer, and otherwise — blurring the boundaries
between the labor of everyday life and artistic labor. It also, by the same
token, recasts the domestic scenes that we are seeing glimpses of as a kind
of research — what kind we don’t yet know, until fuzzy cherries come on
the scene to sing, “This film is about what we love and what we know.”16
    What we love and what we know.
    The love and knowledge presented to us, over the course of the twenty-­
four-­and-­a-­half-­minute video, includes scenes of the labor of making the
video essay itself (which was produced as part of a residency at the Art
Gallery of Ontario) as well as formally enigmatic scenes of domestic life.
These domestic scenes include sequences with the artists’ cats taken with
a camera mounted at cat’s-­eye level, fragments of the couple in bed, and
suggestively stirred bowls of what looks like hummus out of which magi-
cal books fly. These are interspersed with what the video sets up, through
Haseman, as sensuous “practice-­led research” experiments with, through,
and on the two books central to the research that Mitchell and Logue,
we discover, are engaging through the video: Monique Wittig’s  The
Straight Mind and Other Essays and José Esteban Muñoz’s  Cruising
Utopia: The There and Then of Queer Theory.
    The video unpacks these texts, playing with the tools of scholarly
inquiry and imbuing them with eros. It enigmatically plays with scale,
absurd juxtaposition, and anamorphic recalibration, with a disco-­erotic
tongue-­in-­cheek vibe that both draws one in and confounds any clear
reading. Through these formal strategies, Mitchell and Logue queer the
linearity of what Muñoz () calls straight time. And as they do this,
scale is their strongest ally.
    The displacements of scale mobilized by the artists render every scene
incredibly suggestive: an inch-­long Mitchell climbs into the underwear


    Polydisciplinamory  of a real-­size Logue; the cats (pussies) that we came to know in the open-
ing scenes, now shrunk down, wander through the crevasses of a cross-­
stitch vagina that looks almost like a landscape sunset. This scale play of-
fers sites of potential for queer recoding of the research-­and-­love spaces of
everyday (artistic) life. The scholarly labor of the video is imbued at every
turn with erotic charge, their desires explicitly guiding their conceptual
and aesthetic choices, and, without stating any research questions clearly,
the fact that Mitchell and Logue are inquiring into the constructions of
lesbian and queer identity articulated by the Muñoz and the Wittig is
unmistakable.17
    On this reading, Logue and Mitchell’s Hers Is Still a Dank Cave: Crawl-
ing Toward a Queer Horizon inhabits a queer polydisciplinamorous space
of possibility, modeling a relationship to academic knowledge production
that is based on the capacity to care rather than simply know. Organized
experimentally, emergently, not only at the level of content but also of
form, it brings different disciplinary vocalities together, dissonantly, and
offers a horizon driven by both eros and amory. Indeed, the closing scene
of the video leaves us singing along to a song by the Canadian rock band
Rush, calling each of us to come together to “mold a new reality closer to
the heart” (see figure 3.2). Their version, however, offers women, philoso-
phers, queer theorists, and artists as the protagonists of the song:
     And the women who hold low places
     Must be the ones who start
     To mold a new reality
     Closer to the heart
     Closer to the heart
     The blacksmith and the artist
     Reflect it in their art
     They forge their creativity
     Closer to the heart
     Yes closer to the heart
     Philosophers and queer theorists
     Each must know their part
     To sew a new mentality
     Closer to the heart.




video, minutes, color, English,. Video stills courtesy of the artists.




     its strange and unpredictable alliances, the artists ask us to imagine, with
them, “a vision of a queer world in an impossible time and place” (Muñoz
, and deftly model a polydisciplinamo(humo)rous homage (equal
parts love and laughter) to research-­creation. Rather than allowing dis-
cipline to tell them which questions are worthwhile and which methods
are appropriate (whom to love and how and when), they insist that it is
amory — the eros that Haraway taught us about in chapter 1, here recon-
figured through both poly lit and psychoanalytic thinking — that must
determine our research questions as well as our methodological toolkits.
Love, taken in this sense, is something driven and disruptive rather than a
placatingly affirming relation. It is a site of resistance, undoing, and redo-
ing. Love is not the unconditional agape; love is the conditional erotics to
which we are beholden, luring us forward, usually despite ourselves. And
it is to the question of this erotic lure that we now turn. 
              Drive(s)



   The erotic is the nurturer or nursemaid of all our deepest knowledge.... For once
   we begin to feel deeply all the aspects of our lives, we begin to demand from our-
   selves and from our life-­pursuits that they feel in accordance with that joy which
   we know ourselves to be capable of.


   [The] unconscious is to be sought not at the bottom of ourselves, behind the back
   of our “consciousness,” but in front of us, as articulations of our field. It is “uncon-
   scious” by the fact that it is not an object, but it is that through which objects are
   possible, it is the constellation wherein our future is read.



I am not sure when it was that I was first inspired by the thought of a world
organized by labors of love, one in which we each perform the quotidian
labors that bring us the most pleasure. (I find joy in the repetitive calm of
sweeping and feel resentful at the roar of a vacuum.) I am not sure when it
was that I discovered the importance of finding pleasure in labor and first
recognized the political and affective uses of the erotic in this context. But
I am sure that when I first read Audre Lorde’s  lecture “The Uses of the
Erotic: The Erotic as Power” it felt like I was falling in love — recognizing
myself through the relay of the other.
    As well as arguing for the political value of cultivating the erotic (the
cathected, the invested) as our guide in the labor of the everyday, Lorde
argues for the importance of cultivating the erotic as our guide in our
knowledge-­making practices. Her lecture argues for the importance of nur-
turing the “erotic root and satisfactions” of our (pedagogical/political)
labor, even at its most difficult ([], 55). To allow our labor to be
organized by eros. Indeed, to let eros be our guide. At the heart of this
call is a claim for the productive power of nurturing — and the radical
need to nurture — joy: “So every level upon which I sense also opens to
the erotically satisfying experience, whether that is dancing, building a
bookcase, writing a poem, examining an idea... and that deep and irre-
placeable knowledge of my capacity for joy comes to demand from all of
my life that it be lived within the knowledge that such satisfaction is pos-
sible” . – emphasis added). This demand, the demand of the erotic, is
one that shakes complacency and demands care. It is a cathected demand.
As Lorde emphasizes, the erotic forces us “to be responsible to ourselves
in the deepest sense.... Recognizing the power of the erotic in our lives
can give us the energy to pursue genuine change in our world, rather than
merely settling for a shift of characters in the same weary drama” . – 59).
I take this to mean that when things get tough, it is even more urgent
that we, in our pedagogical and institutional spaces, organize ourselves
around micropolitical acts of care, fueled by eros as a powerful and ethical
fulcrum.
    Like many who have committed to the university-­as-­site, my love of
learning — my driven curiosity — was dampened by the (for the most
part) lackluster pedagogical mandates of the elementary and high schools
I attended, by the rote learning (Freire’s banking model) all too familiar
to all too many of us. If Charm had been nearby, I would have followed
her and gone off digging in a heartbeat (if she would have had me) (King
). For a little while, that is exactly what I did (wander off, following
my curiosity), never planning to go to university, let alone stay in it. As
is the case for many if not all of us, somewhere along the way, there were
encounters that changed my pedagogical course, teachers whose passion
and vision and creative generosity lured me toward a research-­creational
life and into joining the ranks of the professoriate. These teachers allowed


me to dig a hole and fall through the other side. While I recall vividly
those teachers in elementary and high school who are responsible for my
even entertaining the idea of college, and those teachers in college who
made it possible for me to imagine graduate school, there are three in par-
ticular who configured my intellectual trajectory in a way that irrevocably
marked my approach to pedagogy, pedagogical desire, and pedagogical
drive.
where I needed to be walking and put me on the path to performance art
theory and practice. It is from her that I learned to be inspired by Fluxus
instruction pieces and durational performance actions as world-­making
artistic forms. The last of the three — the one who ended up supervis-
ing my doctorate ( – — gave me permission to explore and experi-
ment, and taught me how to think with compassion and care at the heart
of my intellectual labor. Everything I learned about feminist theoryprac-
tice I learned from her. One of my ma committee members ( – 4),
a scholar of queer psychoanalytic theory, provided a bridge between
the two. I arrived in his classroom already in love with Lacan but self-­
taught — a young artist, who had stumbled into reading Lacan’s  es-
say on the “The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the I as
Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience” because of an earlier love affair
with the work of Mary Kelly.
    I had first encountered Kelly by reading her as a theorist, through her
essay on “Re-­Viewing Modernist Criticism” (), and followed that up
by learning about her impressive multiyear conceptual art-­and-­life work
Post-­Partum Document, a project that combined Lacanian psychoanalytic
reflection with the objects and exchanges of everyday maternal life. As
I’ve already flagged, it was at this moment that I realized that in order to
understand Post-­Partum Document I needed first to understand Lacan. So,
I picked up “The Mirror Stage.” I remember exactly where I was. I was in
a loft, in the Little Five Points area of Atlanta, GA, sitting on the floor, cof-
fee in hand, a little adrift during the third of my “gap years” between un-
dergraduate life and the graduate school marathon that I didn’t yet know
was to come. Indeed, one way I could tell the story of this encounter with
Kelly’s essay has it being the very thing that planted the seed that became
the lure that drove me toward a university life.
    In any case, it is from these teachers that I first learned—and felt—what


             ,is at stake in the sujet supposé savoir: knowledge configured by cathexis,
drive, and a distinct lack of méconnaissance. These mentors, these sujets
supposé savoir, modeled for me a commitment to nonmimetic mentor-
ship; they each instructed me to nurture and attend to the erotics of my
own drives rather than reproduce myself in their image. And they each
(even if the language of psychoanalysis ended up being proper only to one
of them), invited me to attend to what Lacan famously called the objet petit
a, the Lacanian object-­cause of desire, as pedagogical lure.
    In what follows, I anatomize four lectures that Lacan gave in Paris
in the spring of  on what he called “the gaze as objet petit a,” trac-
ing the contours of the Lacanian lectures themselves, and draw a picture
of the objet petit a as a research-­creational thing-­to-­think-­w ith. These
lectures were given in the grip of friendship; the death of Lacan’s friend
and colleague Maurice Merleau-­Ponty — at whose funeral Lacan openly
wept — haunts its pages, as does Merleau-­Ponty’s thinking (Roudinesco
). While preceding chapters have unpacked my perspectives on
research-­creation as polydisciplinamorous praxis (though only under this
name in chapter 3), this chapter switches gears, pulling out the threads
needed to understand what is at stake in the objet petit a as pedagogical
lure, threads that I offer as a kind of “blind-­contour” drawing that models
the grain of my driven relation to the Lacanian text and continues to ask
what the project of psychoanalysis can do to undo reproductive norms
within university spaces.3
    While the language of this chapter is more technically driven than pre-
vious chapters, what I discuss here is indeed at the heart of everything
written earlier — it is the background for the way that I have been talk-
ing about research-­creational orientations thus far. An understanding of
the objet petit a and respect for the uncanny ways that it reconfigures
our understanding of desire and drive are what undergirds my reading of
Charm’s curiosity and of Haraway’s dog in chapter 1, of interdisciplinarity
in chapter 2, and of polydisciplinamory in chapter 3.
hoping to demonstrate the productive value of psychoanalytic thinking
without passing it off as dogma. For the non – psychoanalytically inclined
reader, I attempt to open up the Lacanian text to provide points of con-
nection with my more or less vernacular use of psychoanalysis in previ-
ous chapters, and, for the psychoanalytically inclined, I work to provide


enough detail to enjoy revisiting Lacan’s well-­trod lectures on the gaze.4
Invariably, I will fail to find the right balance for many readers, but, as
someone convinced of the value of psychoanalytic thinking for the proj-
ect of contesting and remaking university spaces, in the pages that follow,
I try, performing an idiosyncratic reading of Lacan’s lectures on the gaze
as objet petit a for a critical theory of research-­creation.

The first words of Lacan’s opening lecture on the gaze as objet petit a, as
they appear in the published version of Seminar XI (February 19,,
“The Split between the Eye and the Gaze”), direct his listeners, or in our
case his readers, to the etymological valence of the German word Wieder-
holung, which translates in English to something between “repetition,”
“recurrence,” and “reiteration.”
    Wieder: again.
    Holen: to haul.
    To. Haul. Again.
    With these words, almost before we can cognize it, Lacan grounds us
in the physicality of the psychoanalytic drive as something that continues,
repeats, recurs, and that must be hauled again and again, or, rather, that
hauls us, repeatedly ([], 67). He then pairs this “repetition” with
“compulsion,” Wiederholung with Zwang.
    Wiederholungzwang.
    Repetition compulsion.
    The compulsion to haul / be hauled again.
    The pairing works to immediately situate, for his psychoanalytically
savvy audience, Lacan’s titular discussion of the gaze as objet petit a in a
reading of Freud’s Beyond the Pleasure Principle, specifically the fort/da
game of his grandson, little Ernst — a game, it turns out, that has every-
thing to do with the objet petit a.
    In the second chapter of Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud describes
the game that he finds Ernst playing, in the absence of both his father
(who is away, a soldier at war) and his mother, Anna (Freud’s daughter).
Freud senior comes across his grandson playing with a spool with string
still tied to it, throwing the spool away while holding onto the string, let-
ting it fall over the side of the bed, out of sight, and then pulling it back
to where he can see it. As he throws the spool away, Ernst cries, “Fort!”
(Gone!), and as he brings it back he exclaims, “Da!” (There!). In an at-


           ,tempt at symbolic mastery over the (temporary) loss of his mother (here
symbolic of maternal care, plenitude, and love —of Imaginary plenitude),
the little boy turns the spool into a representative of her body and is thus
able to control her departure as well as having the satisfaction of bringing
her back, over and over again, symbolically speaking.
     The game, for Freud, becomes exemplary of a compulsion to repeat,
a drive to return to the scene of (primary maternal) loss as a way to me-
tabolize, and somehow work through, that moment in which the loss of
the mother in fact creates the mother as a site of desire and value. (A Tom
Waits song runs through my head as I write this: “I never saw the sunshine
’til you turned out the light.”)5 It is the mother’s body in this example, or,
rather, the loss of the mother’s body, in its Phantasmatic Imaginary Pleni-
tude, that becomes the archetypal, irrecoverable loss that sets desire into
play and is symbolized by what Lacan names the objet petit a.
     This is one of many psychoanalytic origin stories. And like all stories,
it makes worlds. Analogous to the relation to “Truth” described by the
sujet supposé savoir in chapter 3, here the mother’s body becomes a retro-
actively constituted font of plenitude, forever lost and inevitably sought
after as that “something more” behind every object.6
     It becomes the lure.
     It becomes the object-­cause of desire, setting our stories, and thereby our
words and our worlds into play.
     It becomes the thing that keeps us digging to the other side.
     Articulating a compulsion to repeat, the objet petit a is that object that
makes manifest the drive(s) in the form of desire. Importantly, however,
within this economy, the objet petit a must, like the sujet supposé savoir,
be “deposed” — understood to have no final term, to always be a lure on
the horizon, engaged without méconnaissance but no less powerful for
that fact. We are, in this psychoanalytic paradigm, each, in our own par-
ticular way(s), given by our objets, and it is in recognizing the degree to
which we are driven by these relations, and our being willing to be ac-
countable for and to these ways in which we are driven, that an ethics given
by the insights of psychoanalysis emerges. This is the ethics, in a different
idiom, of Haraway’s Companion Species. This is an ethics structured by
desire without méconnaissance: an ethics given by the objet petit a — the
object-­cause of desire repeatedly articulated by the pulsations of the
drive.7


on the topic (February 26,, “Anamorphosis”), through a reading of
Hans Holbein’s  painting The Ambassadors and its anamorphic skull.
Again he starts etymologically:
    Ana: again.
    Morphosis: to form.
    Anamorphosis, Lacan tells us, is about forming things again, and the
particular ways in which the thing (das Ding), with the objet petit a as
its avatar, is destined to be formed again and again in an open, elliptical
dance as it articulates the circuit of the drive. We see here how he is layer-
ing his concepts, the repetition of anamorphosis echoing the repetition of
Wiederholungzwang, creating semiotic clouds of reference that are meant
to poetically invoke each other. Unsurprisingly, then, Lacan’s lecture be-
gins with a reforming of his own — a rereading of a poem. He tells the
room, “Because I am beginning on time today, I will start by reading a
poem which, in actual fact, has no relation to what I am about to say, but
which is related to what I said last year, in my seminar, about the myste-
rious object, the most concealed object, that of the scopic drive” ([]
, 17). Returning to this poem, read seemingly by happenstance (“be-
cause I am beginning on time today”), Lacan goes on to remind his au-
dience of the longing that he has to address some “unfinished business”
from the previous year’s seminar: a correspondence between that “most
concealed object,” the objet petit a, and castration. And while he states
that the poem “has no relation to what I am about to say,” because these
lectures are spoken extempore, not written, scripted, thereby still actively
and responsively in the land of Thinking rather than crafted into the stasis
of Thought (Readings ), the very fact that he thinks of the poem and
speaks it in the room does, in fact, render it relevant, like that chance thing
spoken in the therapeutic exchange that seems to be off topic but ends up
being key, or like that chance pedagogical encounter that, though forgot-
ten, turns out to have been at work in the background all along.9
    Lacan knows this and is playing with us. Playing with us by modeling
the degree to which, as the unconscious teaches us, we always speak more
than we mean, and highlighting the importance of recognizing that, in the
pedagogical scene, the scene of knowledge, the scene within which he is
speaking, one can never predict which concepts will stick, which will be-
come relevant, which will make a difference, or when any of these things


             ,might happen. In this context, the insufficiency of castration (that thing
that Lacan wants to return to, and that links this lecture to the previous
one) is relevant to our understanding of the objet petit a given what it
demonstrates about the subject in relation to knowledge.
    Psychoanalytically speaking, castration is that condition of being in-
sufficient within the realm of knowledge as certain knowledge, and it is
this condition, the cut of castration, that structures the entire “organi-
zation of the desires through the framework of the fundamental drives”
(Lacan [], 89). The castration complex, marking that desire to
make the invisible visible and reveal the hidden as hidden rather than
missing (therefore as “same” rather than “different” — as fundamentally
recuperable), marks the ways that the psychoanalytic subject is “split.”
The castration complex is that inaugural moment in psychoanalysis that
founds the subject as subject in the very stroke that it is rendered insuffi-
cient, and therefore capable of desire.10
    As Lacan tells us, “the interest the subject takes in his own split is
bound with that which determines it” (83). The objet petit a, emerging
from what psychoanalysis understands as primary repression, marks those
constitutive repressions needed to form the subject as such. It is, as Teresa
de Lauretis reminds us, “not simply an object... but an object set in a mise-­
en-­scène, in the scenario of a narrative from which it acquires its psychic
value as object of the drive” (, 36). It is, as Merleau-­Ponty writes in
the second epigraph to this chapter, “in front of us, as articulations of our
field... it is the constellation wherein our future is read” (, 180).
    In other words, the objet petit a articulates that relation set into motion
by those moments that Lacan understands as the “splits” that create the
subjective crevasses that distinguish each of us in our specific modali-
ties of desire (little Ernst with the bobbin). These aren’t those conscious
modes of desire that can be taken or left, these are the desires that drive
us, willy-­nilly, despite ourselves. It is for this reason that the objet petit a
is the object of our attention and guide in this quest to generate a theo-
retical frame that may be of use in understanding that mode of “love” and
“curiosity” at stake in each of the chapters of this book.
    The objet petit a, research-­creationally speaking, is what we are in the
grip of when we find ourselves pushing our projects into disciplinary and
formal directions that we don’t yet know how to justify. In the psychoana-
lytic frameworks that Lacan is describing, the objet petit a, as that object-­


8. cause of desire toward which we are driven, articulates the drive in the
mode of aim rather than attainment. (I imagine the T-­shirt: “Research
Creationists: We Aim to Aim, Not to Attain!”) The objet petit a gives us
orientations and lures, rather than prescriptive models of practice. It is the
thing that grabs our curiosity, but that we can’t quite comprehend from
where we are situated, and so off we go in pursuit...
    To further unpack this action of the gaze as objet petit a, Lacan then
famously introduces us to the visual structure of anamorphosis. In a para-
graph dedicated to describing Hans Holbein’s The Ambassadors (figure
4.1), Lacan brings our attention to the objects in this well-­k nown Vanitas
painting as objects of learning—objects representing the seven liberal arts
of the trivium and the quadrivium. Within the Vanitas logic, these objects
are objects of material seduction that the viewer must be warned away
from: objects of learning, yes, but of learning within the realm of the mun-
dane rather than the sacred. Furthermore, within the logic of the paint-
ing, as objects representative of the domain of appearance, these stand
in contrast to the illegibility of a dominant form that the viewer can see,
but not read or understand, superimposed over the bottom center of the
picture plane (figure 4.2).
    It is here, in drawing our attention to the illegible object that lies just
below the legible ones, that Lacan turns our attention to the way in which
the Symbolist poet Jurgis Baltrusaitis () describes the viewing of Hol-
bein’s The Ambassadors as a condition of fascination frustrated. Lacan’s
narrative is as follows: You stand before the image, fascinated by the il-
legible foreground form, but ultimately frustrated by the impossibility of
reading it. To escape this frustrating fascination, you eventually walk out
of the room. The fascination with which you were held, however, compels
you to turn around at the last minute, where, from a now oblique angle,
the illegible form suddenly emerges as a perfectly legible skull (figure 4.3).
    Through this story, Lacan dramatizes the relatively mundane point
that the image is, quite simply, organized by two distinct geometral
points, and that, most importantly to the message formally encoded into
the painting, comprehension in the one precludes comprehension in the other.
There is no point from which all can be seen. There is only partiality. In
Haraway’s terms: no God trick, only situatedness.  This is the condi-
tion of knowledge, inhabited ethically, for both Haraway and Lacan.
    The painting, structured by anamorphic dissonance, insists that the


             ,the Younger; Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve (“The Ambassadors”).
© The National Gallery, London.




the Younger; Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve (“The Ambassadors”).
© The National Gallery, London.




  © The National Gallery, London.




viewer negotiate a multiplicity of positions and recognize that there is no
actual position from which the two legibilities can be seen at once. There
is always, will always be, something illegible, no matter what position one
stands in. And that the anamorphic form that constitutes one of the geo-
metral points is, in fact, a skull, only heightens the poetry of this image
as representative, for Lacan, of the death of the subject from a single per-
spectival position.
    Figured by anamorphosis, the objet petit a articulates the subject as
oppositional and emergent simultaneously, something — to bring Har-
away back in through the figure of her cat’s cradle knotwork () — like
a me-not-­me / me-knot-­me. The me-not-­me would be the binary condition
of the subject before the image: I see the Vanitas and see that I don’t see
the anamorphic skull. There is a clear distinction between what is legible
and what is not. The me-knot-­me relation would be one in which the dis-
tinction between me and not-­me is not effaced, but rather emerges as a phe-
nomenon in which I am knotted into the picture as a point of blindness,
scotoma (what Lacan calls the stain): I can now see that from where I was
I could not see, and what I am left with is not the fullness of knowledge but
the precarious contingency of the legible. And it is here that, for Lacan, the
scotoma, that constitutive blind spot in the field of vision (the area of the
optic disc of every mammal where there are no photoreceptors, the very
condition that makes sight possible), comes to figure both a metaphorical
and a biological condition central to consciousness.
    Consciousness, Lacan tells us, is “a principle of méconnaissance, as...
scotoma” ([], 76). We cannot see from all perspectives, but that is
precisely the condition that, to return to Felman and Weber’s insights in
chapter 3, ignites our desire, our curiosity, and that, biologically and meta-
phorically speaking, make sight, always already partial, possible in the
first place: our field of vision is in fact constituted by those very blind spots
that must be compensated for in order for us to see. Thus, given by this
scotomic, anamorphic structure, for Lacan, everything that is inscribed
in the register of the scopic drive is affected (and infected) by ambigu-
ity. The scopic points to both a biological condition and a trope through
which the specificity of human knowledge is organized.12
    Continuing this excavation of the gaze as objet petit a in his third lec-
ture in the series, “The Line and Light,” Lacan begins by drawing two
inverted (and, for now, separated) triangular structures on the board (fig-


              ,



ure 4.4). One triangle designates the organization of the geometral sub-
ject as a point of Imaginary coherence, the point of the “I” at the heart of
Cartesian perspective. This triangle, Lacan says, describes vision from a
mathematical perspective, geometral vision, a subject organized by line
and linked to a conception of autonomous subjectivity (a sovereign view-
ing “I”): I grasp it. The second triangle, in chiasmic opposition to the
first, designates the subject organized not by line, but by light. This second
pole, determined by the realm of what Lacan will call the properly scopic
(scotomic), is attentive to the behavior of light with matter rather than at-
tentive to geometric line. This is the pole of emergence in which it grasps
me. Unlike the subject organized by line, then, the subject organized by
light is positioned variably in space, and is, most importantly, situated in
an ambiguous relation to the eye as bodily organ. (I am reminded of Luce
Irigaray here: “With regard to the movements of my eyes, they do not take
place uniquely within the visible universe: they also happen in the living
crypt of my body and my flesh” [, 165].)
    An organ, Lacan tells us, is defined by its function (organ, from the
Latin organum, means instrument or tool). However, to consider the eye
(or any biological complex) as a singular organ or tool is to ignore and re-
duce the “large multiplicity of functions” (Lacan [], 1that come
together to produce the organ-­complex of the eye. To emphasize his point,
Lacan brings our attention to the fovea, that part of the organ-­complex
responsible for sharp focus and thus without which the entire function of
depth of field upon which the visual depends would collapse. The vari-
able function of depth of field allows for something to come into focus or
not (two distances cannot be in focus at one time). It also requires bin-
ocular vision—two eyes differently positioned to see one scene as three-­
dimensional and not flat. The function of depth of field is thus to grasp and
solicit the subject into a simultaneous and variable set of legibilities.
    In this context, Lacan recounts a story of a summer in his youth spent


by the sea in a poor fishing village where, he tells us, he didn’t fit in. In this
story, Lacan describes himself as a young intellectual from the city who
takes himself to the seaside to experience “something practical, some-
thing physical” ([], 95). One day, he is on a boat with a local fish-
erman (Petit-­Jean). As they are out on the water, the fisherman sees the
sun shining so brightly on a small sardine can that it is reduced to a point
of light. Seeing this, the fisherman turns to Lacan and says the following:
“You see that can? Do you see it? Well, it doesn’t see you!” (95). Lacan tells us
that Petit-­Jean “found this incident highly amusing — I less so. I thought
about it. Why did I find it less amusing than he? It’s an interesting ques-
tion” (95). Asking us to join him in considering why it might have been
that the incident emerged to Lacan as less than amusing, he suggests that
this glistening sardine can, a shiny point of light that the fisherman rec-
ognizes but that Lacan doesn’t, rather than creating a rapport, reveals to
Lacan the degree to which he is out of place in his environment. “It can’t
see you!” becomes the evidence that, at the level of the signifier, the relays
of signification particular to the local culture in which he finds himself, it
is Lacan who is illegible. Already looked at, but not necessarily seen.
    Here, the gaze as objet petit a emerges as a point of light from the field
of the Other. It emerges as a glint. And it is thus, Lacan tells us, that we
discover something about the subject in relation to the point of light: at
the level of the symbolic, the eye, as organ, is caught up in a similar dia-
lectic to that of the phallus: a dialectic of insufficiency. It is always already
on the cusp of not knowing, of being out of place, of being wrong. Repeat-
ing the point that he made earlier, but using a new story to do so, Lacan
grounds our reading of the optical function of the organ-­complex of the
eye in a symbolic narrative regarding the social positioning of the subject:
the subject as blind spot that emerges in relation to a point of light that is
the condition of possibility for vision itself.
    There is one final fold of this foray through Lacan that is relevant
here — one last lecture — one that returns us to the question of artistic
form. In his final seminar on the gaze as objet petit a, “What Is a Picture?,”
Lacan superimposes the two triangles that he has already introduced us
to in order to underscore the degree to which the action of the subject
within the Lacanian paradigm must be understood not from one side of
the schema (line) or the other (light), but as suspended between these two
overlapping functions.


 ,


    At this point we are asked to hold together two narratives that revolve
around what makes sense in both senses of the word: the geometrical
structurality of anamorphosis (lecture 1) and the variable contingency of
depth of field (lecture 3), and to understand the objet petit a as that which
enmeshes the subject in a field from which it can never emerge as simply
subject or object, but through which it is always already in a relation of
becoming-­w ith the world. Here, becoming-­with the objet petit a inaugu-
rates a dialogue in which the “I grasp it” always only emerges in a dance
with the “it grasps me.” This is the dance of desire and drive.
    When the two triangles are superimposed, this schema (figure 4.5),
borrowed from Merleau-­Ponty, becomes animated as a fold, an intertwin-
ing, a chiasm (Merleau-­Ponty ). Lacan puts it thus: “The schema of the
two triangles which are inverted at the same time as they must be placed
one upon the other... is the first example of this functioning of the inter-
lacing, the intersection, chiasma, which I pointed out above, and which
structures the whole of this domain” ([], 95). The two functions,
like each “side” of the chiasmus articulating the scopic, are intertwined,
interlaced, and describe the subject as imbricated. Superimposing the two
triangles highlights, for Lacan, the following: that between the eye and
the gaze there is no coincidence. Placing these two schema on top of each
other does not render them a coincident singularity but a relational unit:14
the “image” articulating the realm of the Imaginary (capture) interwoven
with the “screen” of the Symbolic (the function of the veil). Within this
relation, rather than coincidence there is lure. This lure emerges before us
in the form of an encounter with the flesh of the objet petit a.
    Prefiguring the kind of intertwining that Lacan will turn to almost ten
years later when he develops his Borromean Knot, the Imaginary (image)
and the Symbolic (screen) function relationally. However— and this is


the crucial point — the subject emerges between these as terms that func-
tion antinomically, that is, between two correct but contrary statements:
the subject is subject of representation; the subject is subject of the gaze.
Within this chiasm knowledge is emergent, not predictable from its con-
stituent parts.
    The subject that Lacan is attempting to describe oscillates between
two points: the subject of representation and the gaze as that point from
which, in the field of the Other, the objet petit a emerges as a glistening,
enigmatic, alluring point of light. Accordingly, it is with the question of
enigmatic desire — to see, to want, but to want and see what. — that
Lacan ends his four lectures on the gaze as objet petit a.
    Under the superimposed triangles, Lacan writes the following. 
   This cryptic set of statements refers to the Greek parable of the artists
Zeuxis and Parrhasios: Zeuxis, in a duel for painterly perfection, produces
a painting able to fool nature — he paints grapes such that birds fly from
the sky to peck at them. Parrhasios, in turn, produces a painting of a veiled
painting that fools Zeuxis into impatiently asking Parrhasios to unveil
his work so as to see who is the better painter ([], 112). Whereas
the fooling of the birds (in Lacan’s admittedly anthropocentric retelling)
describes a relation entirely caught up in Imaginary capture (what Lacan
will call the dompte-­regard or “taming of the gaze,” a structure that tames
curiosity by seeming to give all there is to see), the fooling of Zeuxis (by
suggesting that there is something to see behind the veil) ignites desire
through the technique of trompe l’oeil. In this story, one set of actors (the
birds) respond to the sign grape, while the other set of actors (the painters)
respond to the veiled promise, to the seductive promise of something be-
hind the curtain (insert flashes of Dorothy and the Wizard), of something
more. As Lacan puts it, “Parrhasios makes it clear that if one wishes to de-
ceive a man, what one presents to him is the painting of a veil, that is to say,
something that incites him to ask what is behind it” (1emphasis added).


              ,then tells us that while the subject of the gaze is aligned with light and
Parrhasios’s trompe l’oeil, the subject of representation is aligned with the
geometral (line) and Zeuxis’s dompte-­regard. The dompte-­regard is re-
served, Lacan tells us, for a representational function that we can align
with the geometral, a form of representation that sutures the subject into
a relation of certainty with the image — I know what I see and it pleases
me — and that thus invites the viewer to “lay down his gaze” (101). The
action of laying down the gaze, of visual pacification, is contrasted with
representational practices that conversely mobilize the gaze as a mode of
scopic solicitation that does not work through pacification (he draws on
surrealist painters such as André Breton to make this argument). Such
representational practices work by luring the viewer into a relational
schema that activates their desire — to explore, engage, question. It acti-
vates their curiosity. Like the de Manian reading of irony (de Man )
and like the Freudian uncanny, trompe l’oeil insists— in the realm of the
visual — that one can never be sure. It is turtles all the way down. And it is
here that Lacan’s conception of the radical function of art emerges, a con-
ception of art that this chapter claims for research-­creation: the setting
up of a dialogue, through the objet petit a, with a Real that erupts where
and when it is least expected (Lacan [], 112). Eros, not agape. By
the nose. Down the hole.

There is a debt that I owe in my thinking through of the original Laca-
nian lectures in this chapter, and that is to the artist and psychoanalyst
Bracha Ettinger. In her  The Matrixial Gaze and, later, in her  The
Matrixial Borderspace, Ettinger reworks Lacan’s conception of the gaze as
objet petit a, refiguring (what she sees as the phallocentrism of) the objet
with what she calls a Matrixial link a. Grounded in an understanding of
the Matrixial (literally “of the womb”), Ettinger’s work draws us into a
theoretical terrain informed by intrauterine life understood as the realm
of the protosymbolic, a realm not of symbolic binaries, but of partial con-
nection and emergent knowledges. For Ettinger, in a way that is informed
by the grain of the Lacanian text here described, the condition of being
simultaneously one and two, placed and displaced, grasped and grasping, is
taken as a constitutive relation articulating the “self” as a site of multiple,
emergent, and enmeshed attachments. Through this, the Matrixial high-



lights, in a different (although allied) way to the Lacanian text as I have
read it above, a crisis in autonomy.
    The Matrixial relation, Ettinger tells us, opens up a different form of
connectivity with others. It renders incoherent those ways of doing and
being organized by strict individuation. It is, according to feminist art
historian Griselda Pollock, a call “to shift the field of debate beyond the
phallus and to make time to consider the possibilities and implications of
the matrixial borderspace” (Ettinger, — not a theory of essences
and origins but, in Ettinger’s idiom, of potentialities and event-­encounters;
it brings together, antinomically, a discourse of castration with one of the
womb.
    Ettinger thus tells a different, although allied, story to Lacan’s. Rather
than a story told from the Phallic-­Maternal position — a being both self
and Other — Ettinger offers a Matrixial substratum to the Symbolic that
proposes an other site of emergence for subjectivity, a site that both pre-
cedes and accompanies the phallic cut of castration. Here, the maternal,
significantly recoded under the sign of the matrix, can be used to chal-
lenge the hegemony of Phallic-­Symbolic or Phallogocentric orders of
difference. But, instead of offering a binary other, an opposition to those
Western patriarchal orders, the Matrixial operates in, with, and alongside
phallic structuration. It intervenes from within, always already partial. It
offers itself as an undutiful para-­site figuring a primary relationality that is
never (just) the relation of two individualities but is a situated, ecological
enmeshment that articulates itself emergently. Emergent, uncanny, unpre-
dictable... the objet petit a as the uncanny boundary object animating
our research-­creational hearts finds an ally in the Matrixial link a.
    The objet petit a becomes link a.
    Or, perhaps a new conjunction— link+/objet a — makes more sense in
this context, emerging anamorphically and unpredictably between and
with gaze and eye, light and line, trompe l’oeil and dompte-­regard.
    I began this book by asserting the following provocation as central to
research-­creation: the crafting of a research question is the crafting of a story
that is also the crafting of an ethics. I now reconfigure that opening gambit
to propose our research questions as, in fact, our driven given symptoms
(our sinthomes), setting up a dialogue with the world, and driven by the
very real pulsations of our links+/objets a. If we understand research-­
creation as productive of undutiful, uncanny, boundary objects, it is the


,queer and queering, polydisciplinamorous link+/objet a that organizes
such production. It does so by insisting we attend to those drives and
desires that animate our stories — the stories that we find ourselves told
by — and the ethics embedded in such modes of attention. The stories at
stake here are not conscious. These aren’t simply stories that we mobi-
lize, that we control. These are stories that grasp us as much if not more
than we grasp them. Stories with as much weight as those we started with
in chapter 1. And, thus, it is to perhaps the most important story, for our
contemporary moment, that I now turn. That link+/objet a hovering en-
igmatically before me, erupting into the grain of my everyday. That thing
we are calling the Anthropocene. 


   Art at the End of the World



   Climate change tethers us to a perspective that oscillates between the impossible
   and the inevitable, already and not yet, everywhere but not here, not quite.


   We cannot win this battle to save species and environments without forging an
   emotional bond between ourselves and nature —for we will not fight to save what
   we do not love.



I remember the first time I saw Stanley Kubrick’s  film Dr. Strangelove,
Or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb. Filmed in black
and white, with a slow, cynical pace and dark humor, Dr. Strangelove sati-
rizes Cold War logics by showing a catastrophic chain of events that lead
to a thermonuclear war between the US and the Soviet Union. Although
still young during the Reagan-­Mulroney-­T hatcher-­Gorbachev era, when
the nuclear arms race dominated the Western popular imaginary of the
end of the world, I was old enough to be affected by it, in the news, on tv,
and in reruns of films like this, only partially comprehended by me at the
time, but, in some ways, all the more powerful for that.
ing. First, there is Dr. Strangelove’s uncannily animate arm, rising with
unruly, uncanny, insistence into its natural resting pose (the “Sieg Heil”
gesture) — an alien agency that Strangelove works hard to resist. Second,
there is that iconic image of the captain of the final rogue airplane, riding
a deployed nuclear warhead bareback (it having been deployed while he
was straddling it, trying to make repairs), cowboy hat in hand, whoop-
ing and hollering with the jouissance of wartime destruction as he heads
toward his target and his death. Third, there is the orgiastic final scene of
the film, as nuclear warheads are deployed on a massive scale — an apoca-
lyptic ecstasy of mushroom clouds set to classical music. This final scene,
aerially depicted and aestheticized, offers a seductive God’s-­eye view of
the end of the world. It is an end of the world that we, as viewers, are some-
how exempt from, being offered, by the work of the film, a front-­row seat
to its dompte-­regard.
    The title of the film made me curious then, and it still does today:
   Dr. Strangelove,
     Or:
     How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb.
   Is the only way to “stop worrying and love the bomb” to have a God’s-­
eye view or some God-­trick-­like plan through which to, at least phantas-
matically, escape the destruction? Am I to stop worrying by identifying
with Dr. Strangelove and his plan to go to the mines,1 thereby surviving
to see both the End and the New Beginning, remaining hopeful for a
technofix that, though partial, applies at least to me? Or is the film sim-
ply interpolating us, as viewers, into its Cold War logic, asking us to stop
worrying by pointing out the absurdity of mutually assured destruction,
inviting us to walk away, our denialism intact, feeling a little calmer in
the knowledge that the film is merely articulating the hyperbolic anxious
underbelly of the nuclear arms race and that nothing this crazy could ever
really happen?
   And if this set of confusions weren’t enough, what is that strange equiv-
alence between Dr. Strangelove and How I Learned to Stop Worrying and
Love the Bomb, put in place by the Or that relates them? Is Dr. Strangelove
functioning as a metonym for his very own “final solution”? If so, is the “I”
invoked by the title one of the chosen, that, like those stepping onto Noah’s



. ark, will survive after the planet is scourged in a nuclear flood, making our
capacity to “stop worrying” equivalent to our capacity to identify with or
count ourselves among those tasked with repopulating the planet?
   Perhaps it is only the nuclear warhead – riding cowboy who can truly
stop worrying and love the bomb by accepting the course that he is on and
riding it orgiastically to his death.
   That is, after all, the image that prefigures the film’s final frames, of-
fering an ejaculatory vision of the destruction of most life on the planet.
Swift. Complete. Heroic in its own way. And absolutely gorgeous.
   No one lingers on in a half-­life of suffering in this image.

The language of the end of the world, and the denial, deferral, and de-
spair of that language, seems to be everywhere these days. The end of
democracy, the end of capitalism, the end of higher education, the end of
the planet. Methane, plastic, ocean acidification, melting ice caps. No one
knows what will hit next or how quickly things will accelerate.
    That we are living in petrocapitalist end times is reflected not only in
the news cycle and popular media, but in a plethora of academic book
and project titles, from philosopher Timothy Morton’s  book Hyper-
objects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World, anthropologist
Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing’s The Mushroom at the End of the World (),
and science and technology studies scholar Laura Watts’s  Energy at
the End of the World, to Indigenous Studies scholar Kim TallBear’s 
“Tipi Confessions: Sex at the End of the World,” Deleuzian educational
theorist Jessie Beier’s doctoral thesis “Teaching at the End of the World,”
and feminist philosopher Chloë Taylor’s special journal issue Social Justice
at the End of the World. Importantly, while mobilizing “end-­of-­the-­world”
language, each of the above notes (in one way or another) that: “We are
not living at ‘the end of the world,’ despite the popularity of this phrase in
Social Science and Humanities literature on the Anthropocene; we are,
however, living at the end of a world” (Taylor ). In other words, we are
looking not at the end of the world writ large but the end of the world as
we know it under petrocultural colonial capitalism and anthropocentric
humanism.3
    Perspectives such as these reject anthropocentric reproductive futu-
rity and work to reorient how we do what we do, our networks of account-
ability and care, in response to global warming. If the project isn’t (only)


Conclusion to ensure our own survival at the level of the individual or the species, if
we give up on the pathological narcissism of me-­at-­all-­costs,4 then how
might we, workers in the university, orient ourselves in our current proj-
ect of everyday academic life under the sign of the Anthropocene and
its others (the Plantationocene, the Chthulucene, etc.)? How might we
inhabit human, nonhuman, never-­been-­human, and more-­than-­human
social webs differently at all scales of existence?
    What the future holds I cannot guess, nor do I want to. But what I can,
want to, and must do is move forward, one classroom, degree, article, book,
conference, conversation, and artistic research project at a time, looking
to support multimodal ways of working in and with an arts and humani-
ties attuned to more-­than-­human social justice, arguing for the impor-
tance of focusing on how we do what we do within university spaces as we
face the end of the world (as we know it). (Again, a song plays through
my head.)5
    If the university is, indeed, to be “for the public good” and “uplifting
the whole people” (the vision and values language of my home univer-
sity),6 then we desperately need new pedagogical and political strategies
that force us to ask new questions — new ways of organizing that take
Charm’s curiosity, Lacan’s objet petit a, and Haraway’s dog seriously. As
Cathy Davidson argues in her  The New Education: How to Revolu-
tionize the University to Prepare Students for a World in Flux (though not in
this idiom), we need a university in which new situated kinship ties (dis-
ciplinary, affective, social, political) are the name of the game within the
bastions of knowledge that we inhabit. And, as excavated in these pages,
research-­creation is what helps orient me within these needs.
    The question of “art at the end of the world,” for me, emerges chiasti-
cally with the questions of how to make art at the end of the world, how
to teach art at the end of the world, and even why teach art at the end of
the world (or maybe, with Rush in our ears, “how to teach [he]art at the
end of the world” is what I am after). Indeed, this last might do the best
job linking art and artistic orientations with the kinds of love at stake in
this book-­like manifesto-­from-­the-­heart. In art schools today we teach
approaches that inherit Duchamp, the Situationist International, and
Joseph Beuys; that take feminism, queer, crip, and critical race studies,
decolonization, and ecology seriously. We teach media forms that work




. Conclusion
to defamiliarize and call into question the way we do what we do in our
little pods of human sociality so practiced at sedimenting the new into the
naturalized that we need constant reminders that the way things are need
not be the case. And it is precisely because of the way that art (understood
in the broadest sense) urges us to act upon, or at least sit with, the ways in
which the way things are need not be the case that research-­creation is so
desperately needed everywhere in the academy.
    In this context, I stake my lot with art that works at the micropolitical
level of the here and now — art with an activist impulse. Such an art offers
speculative frames through which to defamiliarize and reorganize the lo-
cal. And perhaps most importantly, such an art is a form of research that
gathers, experiences, embodies, and transmits in ways that offer an odd
sort of ethics, one that takes its orientation polydisciplinamorously from
our links+/objets a.

In my classes, these days, I ask my students to think with me about how
debate on the Anthropocene might shift how we engage in meaning-
ful arts practice and theory. I also ask them to think with me about how
research-­creation, as an epistemological and methodological intervention
into traditional scholarly research practices, might contribute to these
debates within and without the academy. Alongside readings that offer
critical analyses of the contested terrain of Anthropocene discourse (in-
cluding decolonial and multispecies challenges to anthropocentric, capi-
talist, and colonialist ideologies) we look to develop research-­creational
practices that nurture our capacities not only to reflect and analyze but to
act and intervene, mobilizing research-­creation as a way to develop work
that is not simply on ecological topics but that takes ecological form — not
just on but as.
   I have written elsewhere on the artist Marilyn Arsem’s use of ice as
an object of durational contemplation in her ecologically themed perfor-
mance interventions, and compared these modest gestures to the large-
scale ice sculptures of Olafur Eliasson (Loveless  and forthcoming).
Both of these artists ask the same thing of us: to watch ice melt. Both ask
us to watch ice melt as a way of inviting contemplation on anthropogenic
climate change. One requires massive petrodollars to ship arctic ice to
urban locations (e.g., Paris), and installs it sculpturally for aesthetic and




              dramatic effect. The other modestly holds spheres of ice, while standing
or sitting blindfolded, and asks passersby to sit with her as the ice melts.
Here scale matters. And form matters.
    As it has been mobilized in this book, this mattering is something
that research-­creation is especially positioned to help us think through.
Research-­creation mobilizes the artistic as a sensibility and approach
attentive to how form makes worlds, and does so specifically within the
university-­as-­site. Research-­creation lends itself to formal reshaping prac-
tices within university knowledge-­making spaces, and, at its best, for me,
it does so micropolitically, bit by bit, from inside the belly of the beast:
the classroom.
    Haraway writes in Staying with the Trouble: “What is needed is action
and thinking that does not fit within dominant capitalist cultures.... [We
need] on the ground collectives capable of new practices of imagination,
resistance, revolt, repair, and mourning and living and dying well” (,
51). Importantly, in developing such practices, she tells us, a “common
livable world must be composed, bit by bit, or not at all” (emphasis
added). These common livable worlds are what I see my students work-
ing to compose, allowing the micropolitical insistence on the “bit by bit”
to help them in developing their research-­creational projects in modest,
sustainable ways.
    One such project stands out for me from the first time I taught my Art
and/in the Anthropocene seminar (the seminar of my heart, as it were).
It was developed by a fourth-­year undergraduate student, who, trying to
navigate the affective complexity of our current ecological crisis, devel-
oped the following research question: “How could acts of self-­care, intra-­
species or human-­to-­human care, and multispecies care, function as in-
terventions or acts of re-­worlding within the current geological age? What
does it mean to enact an ethics of care in a time so marked by cultural
and intra-­species violence?” To explore these questions, she not only read
(and wrote about) scholars like Haraway (), Myers (a, b), and
Puig de la Bellacasa (), she developed an artistic research methodol-
ogy designed to recalibrate her experience of the everyday, composing a
new affective terrain for her research... bit by bit.
    Over the course of the semester, drawing on the performance form of
“daily practice,” she set herself the following task: to perform, every day,




three separate care actions—an act of self-­care, an act of intraspecies care,
and an act of multispecies care. This project pushed her to situate care
both as an open question (“how to care”) and as a conscious and active
part of her day-­to-­day life, and, in her words, “challenged the passivity
with which academic theory is too often lived” (Plouffe ). Her final
project took the form of a scholarly essay paired with a sculptural video
installation recording her documentation of these acts and reflecting on
the thick web of accountability, care, and relation she was called into over
the course of the semester.
    In their introduction to the edited volume Art in the Anthropocene: En-
counters among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies, Heather
Davis and Etienne Turpin suggest that “the conceptual terrain of art at
the end of the twentieth century moved increasingly away from decon-
struction and psychoanalysis toward an open field of naturecultures,
infrastructure assemblages, and other newly contested territories” (,
15). While in alliance with the perspectives embraced in theirs and simi-
lar volumes, in these pages I have allowed my sustained love of psycho-
analytic theory, as a toolkit richly able to help us think with the forces
of affect, desire, and drive, to undutifully propagate with my interest in
nonanthropocentric approaches in the arts and humanities. Each chapter
has promiscuously intertwined theoretical insights from disparate fields,
and in so doing woven an argument for the importance of situated, driven,
research-­creational approaches in the university today — approaches that
I find pedagogically and affectively generative. Written from the heart, in
these pages I’ve offered analysis, provocation, and hope for a better-­enough
way of doing things in the grain of the everyday, for myself and my peers.
Indeed, for all who labor as teachers, as students, as artists, as academics,
and as nomadic hybrids of all sorts in the university today.
    As a midlevel scholar in an international university landscape where I
hear of more and more colleagues choosing to leave the university if they
can, either to have more liveable lives or, more distressingly, because they
have decided that the critical theoretical and political work that they need
to do can no longer find a way to thrive within university structures, I’ve
decided that I need both the tools of feminist science studies and psy-
choanalysis. I need Haraway’s situated knowledging and response-­ability as
much as Lacan’s sujet supposé savoir and objet petit a. I need to keep care




video installation documenting three-­week daily practice project,.
Photo courtesy of the artist.




and cathexis, driven situated curiosity, relational enmeshment, feminist
collaborative praxis, and love center stage in the game of academic inter-
vention and sustainability, and these are the tools that help me to do so.
    Research-­creation, thus figured, is a driven, erotic, uncanny orien-
tation, one that holds queer theory’s radical undoing together with the
emergent attachments of polydisciplinamorous practice. It asks us to be
accountable to our erotic, care-­fi lled, passionately attached, troublesomely
curious givens, and invites us to inhabit a web made up of our links+/objets
a without méconnaissance or dompte-­regard. Not taming the gaze; ignit-
ing desire: Wo Es war, soll Ich werden.8
    Holding dissonant forms together in ways that are passionately at-
tached and that resist naturalization, research-­creation tells new stories
and offers new sites of traction in the academy. It mobilizes forms that
anamorphically shatter single-­point perspective, failing to cohere fully
into art or scholarship, instead nurturing driven curiosity as its lure and
guide: the desires articulating the eruptions of the drive(s) that animate
each of us in unpredictable, but nonetheless accountable, directions. It
demands the production of new, unruly, driven stories within the univer-
sity as not only a bastion of privilege, but a site of intense transformative
pedagogical power.
    And while these desire-­driven perspectives, and, indeed, the question
of how to make art at the/an end of the/a world (as we know it), might not
seem compelling or urgent to those seriously working in the context of
anthropogenic climate change today, it might be worth recalling, here,
Haraway’s question in The Companion Species Manifesto quoted in chapter
1: “Beyond the personal, simple fact of joy in time and work with my dogs,
why do I care? Indeed, in a world full of so many urgent ecological and
political crises, how can I care?” (, 61).
    Being someone situated in the university, researching and teaching
with most breaths on most days, pedagogy is how I care.
    I understand how I do what I do in the university as a political act that
situates me in the nuts and bolts of the classroom, of disciplinary logics,
and of degree-­granting structures. These, with a nod to Joseph Beuys, are
my artistic raw materials. But the nuts and bolts of the university within
which I operate cannot ignore the urgency with which our collective
futures are in question. The students passing through our halls inherit
the socio-­ecological-­economic mess that we, ourselves, have inherited.


              The future seems bleak and how to move forward and for whom — Cui
Bono — is an open question (Star ).
   I side, in writing this book, with colleagues across the globe who teach
social and ecological justice, who work to create brave spaces for students,
and who are being put on antipedagogical conservative watch lists. In the
face of such insidiously hostile conditions, it is important to gather to-
gether and listen to each other and lean on each other, precisely because
this is a moment when we, the already overstretched and politically ac-
tive, are being asked to start doing more of what we already do. Given that
we are already hard at work fighting for social and economic and climate
justice, each in our own corners and in our own ways, how do we, with
each other and with our students, work to short-­circuit the oscillation be-
tween denialism and despair that too often sets in with problems of such
scope?
   We are not, most of us, leaving our jobs to go to Burnaby or Standing
Rock or Washington to engage in long-­term protest. What we have is our
research and our classrooms: our capacity to nurture critical and creative,
passionate and complex theorypractice. And in these pedagogical spaces,
just as important as the nurturing of participatory dissent and debate in
the classroom, to my mind, and in some ways much more difficult, is the
nurturing of affective resilience. Participatory dissent, here, names a prac-
tice of thinking with that allows for and honors dissent between people
and within our own selves and projects;9 affective resilience names the prac-
tice of nurturing spaces of erotic, cathected, link +/objet petit a – driven care,
without méconnaissance, within our social, political, and pedagogical
spaces.
   This is what Audre Lorde frames as the need to cultivate the erotic
drives at the heart of our knowledge-­making and -­shaping projects. This
is what King invites us to think in challenging us to orient ourselves to-
ward a different ethics: You’ve heard it now. This is what Haraway nurtures
in attending seriously to the relations of becoming between herself, Ro-
land, and Cayenne. Again: eros, not agape. And because of this—because
of the friction and nonconsonance needed by eros — the two, participa-
tory dissent and affective sustainability, must go hand in hand. We want
our students informed and active, but also to develop modes of engage-
ment that are sustainable and capacious. To recall Stengers in the first of
the epigraphs to this book, “We need researchers able to participate in the


. Conclusion
creation of the responses on which the possibility of a future that is not
barbaric depends” (, 73).
    This book-­like-­manifesto-­of-­the-­heart has argued that research-­creation
is relevant here not only for its relation to those artistic modes understood
as art-­as-­social-­practice and those grouped under the pedagogical turn,
but also for the wrench that it throws, if done right, into academic daily
practice and pedagogy. The university, as Bill Readings aptly, presciently
stated, is in neoliberal ruins. What once seemed insult heaped upon in-
jury (see Royle’s wonderful response to the Research Assessment Exercise
in ) now feels analogous to the hyperobjectivity Morton assigns to
climate change — a massively distributed, inevitable, and unlocalizable
problem that has crept into every corner of the academic everyday. Cut-
ting corners and rushing toward shiny metrics, at all scales of existence, is
part of what has gotten us into this mess.
    As a modest response, I turn to research-­creation to encourage modes
of temporal and material attunement within the academy that require
slowing down in a way that does not fetishize the slow but in which slow-
ness comes from the work of defamiliarization and the time it takes to
ask questions differently. Research-­creation, at its best, has the capacity to
impact our social and material conditions, not by offering more facts, dif-
ferently figured, but by finding ways, through aesthetic encounters and
events, to persuade us to care and to care differently. By wedging open
what gets to count as research, where, when, and how, research-­creation,
as I have mobilized it in these pages, works to render each of us a little
more capable, a little more care-­fi lled, opening us onto new webs of senso-
rial attunement and nurturance.10

I am not so naive as to assert that everything that travels under the sign of
research-­creation, these days, does this. But I am so stubborn as to suggest
that this is what it ought to be doing.
   Faced with the question of how to live, make, breathe, teach, and learn
art at the end of the world, this is my response.




 



Introduction: Art in the Expanded Field

1. An “axiomatic structure,” for Krauss, emerges between “architecture and not-­
architecture,” and a “marked site” between “landscape and not-­landscape.” Over the
years following her essay, the former will come to be called installation art and the lat-
ter earth or land art. For her full analysis and diagrams, see Krauss. 
2. The pedagogical (or educational) turn names contemporary social and political art
interventions that take the university, the classroom, and other spaces of teaching and
learning as not only their subject matter but also as the basis of their artistic form.
3. I discuss the unique pedagogical program at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts,
Boston, in Loveless (forthcoming).
4. International debate surrounding these programs has most often focused on the
need for individualized programs of study (based on mfa critique models) that make
room for and, indeed, champion the intuition-­based aspects of artistic praxis as a
necessary site of resistance to increasingly standardized and globalizing models of
postsecondary education that focus on uniform legibility at the expense of individu-
ality and innovation (Borgdorff and Dombois ; Hannula ; Haseman ;
Hetland et al. ; Slager ; Stévance and Lacasse ; M. Wilson ). Such
models, adopted from international accords such as the European Bologna Declara-
tion () and its Australian counterpart, the Brisbane Initiative (), and national
structures such as the UK’s Research Assessment Exercise (r ae), turned Research
Excellence Framework (ref) in, are increasingly at work in North America
(Biggs ; Candy and Edmonds ; Derrida ; Kamuf ; Readings ;
Royle ). There is a large body of literature on the topic. The share network is
one of many non – institutionally specific gathering spaces for this research in a Euro-
pean context. For share’s overview and bibliography of artistic research resources,
see www.sharenetwork.eu/artistic-­research-­overview/bibliography. Other existing
organizations include the Society for Artistic Research, the Swiss Artistic Research
Network, and the European Art Research Network. There are also many journals wor-
thy of note in this context, such as the Journal for Artistic Research and Art and Research.
For an ongoing and updated list of doctoral programs in the arts and their starting
dates, see Elkins (n.d.).
5. In  Dr. Sophie Stévance was offered the first, and to date only, Canada Research
Chair in Research-­Creation (that is, with research-­creation in the title of the appoint-
ment), in music, at the Université Laval (Québec). The Canada Research Chairs Pro-
gram (crcp) was created by the Government of Canada in  as “a national strategy
to make Canada one of the world’s top countries in research and development.” For
more information on this program, see crc (n.d.).
6. While there are some continuities between the more established English-­language
(European and Australian) contexts for these debates and the Canadian one, and, in
turn, some commonalities between how things are unfolding between Canada and the
United States, it is important to note that Canada has robust national funding councils
that are genuinely committed to research-­creation. Generally speaking, in the United
States research-­creational (and other innovative) pedagogical experiments emerge as
localized institutional acts. In Canada, however, the landscape of research-­creation is
figured as a national academic discourse: though many in the academy are confused
by it, research-­creation carries the legitimacy of being its very own social sciences and
humanities funding category.
7. See sshrc () to follow the rhetoric and justification for their initial sshrc
research-­creation pilot program.
8. Though this distinction no longer appears on their website, it is important to this
book as a whole. References to research/creation were replaced by references to research
and creation and creative research in.
9. A statement like this is likely to cause anxiety on many fronts. To argue for research-­
creation as a funding category that is not earmarked for the fine arts (specifically art
professors in the university who are unable to fund students through other means)
ignores the degree to which research-­creation was initially brought into sshrc to ad-
dress a problem: that while the university fine arts professoriate was increasing in num-
bers across Canada, it was significantly underrepresented in national research funding
profiles (many Canadian universities don’t count Canada Council for the Arts funding
when tallying their professor-­generated research dollars, and Canada Council money



generally can’t be used to fund graduate students). To argue for an expanded under-
standing of research-­creation has, then, to be done very carefully, as these are real,
pragmatic needs. My aim is to find a way to address these pragmatic needs without
closing down needed debate on research-­creation as interdisciplinary praxis relevant
across the university.
This is an argument that was made forcefully in  by Linda Nochlin in her ger-
minal essay “Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?”
A similar argument is made by Erin Manning in her chapter “Against Method” in
The Minor Gesture.  Owen Chapman and Kim Sawchuk also speak to the need
for research-­creation to exceed the bounds of the fine arts in their article “Creation-­
as-­Research: Critical Making in Complex Environments”.  Chris Salter’s Alien
Agency: Experimental Encounters with Art in the Making () does a wonderful job
bringing examples of such practices together, in their most unpredictable and emer-
gent forms.
Hybrid practice-­t heory doctoral degrees in other, related, fields such as the digital
humanities, design, communications studies, architecture, and performance studies
have their own genealogical trajectories. Caitlin Fisher’s “Building Feminist The-
ory: Hypertextual Heuristics” (York University, Toronto, ) was (to the best of
my knowledge) the first “born-­d igital” research-­creation doctoral thesis in Canada,
and Owen Chapman’s “Selected Sounds: A Collective Investigation into the Practice
of Sample-­Based Music” (Concordia University, Montreal, ), the first research-­
creation PhD to come out of a communication studies department in Canada. The
Université de Québec a Montréal (uquam) was the first to offer a French-language
doctorate in research-­creation in Canada (it awarded its first PhD in  to Louise
Paillé with a thesis called “Archéologie d’une démarche de création en arts visuels: les
livres-­l ivres”). On these overlapping histories and practices in the Quèbec context see,
among others, Le Coguiec and Gosselin () and Béland and Paquin (), and
the websites for Hexagram (https://hexagram.ca/index.php/eng/), Milieux (htts://
milieux.concordia.ca), and Sense Lab (https://senselab.ca). Thank you to both Erin
Manning and Chris Salter for robust discussion on these histories. Although in con-
versation with these other disciplinary trajectories, this book is focused specifically on
the practice and pedagogy of research-­creation in the visual arts in English, one of the
primary domains in which I have been trained, teach, and work.
See, as but one of many (almost daily) examples of academics bemoaning the end of
the university, Terry Eagleton’s critique of the creative knowledge economy endemic
to the widespread neoliberalizing of university spaces in the UK context in “The Slow
Death of the University”. 
On slow scholarship, see Mountz et al. (); and Berg and Seeber. 
Historian of technology and pedagogical innovator Cathy Davidson acutely as-
sesses these conditions in The New Education: How to Revolutionize the University to



         Notes to Introduction        Prepare Students for a World in Flux.  The failure to adequately credit experi-
mental academic labor emerges in a particularly strong way with collaborative prac-
tices which, despite collaborative work often requiring more time and labor than in-
dividual research projects, are often seen as less meritorious. On the ground, across
the university, there are individuals doing fantastic, committed, innovative things,
many of which are allied with the perspectives mobilized in this book under the sign of
research-­creation. Unfortunately, these innovations, while applauded in name, are too
often unsupported in practice. The roadblock, here, is in the institutional and peda-
gogical conditions that render the doing of innovative, experimental, and collaborative
work “extra-­to-­load” or simply illegible as equally weighted scholarship.
Joseph Beuys’s “social sculptural” presentations of lectures as performances and
blackboard remnants as art objects remain a central touchstone for many interested
in the pedagogical turn. Coined by Beuys in the mid-­s to describe his expanded
conception of art, the idea of social sculpture informed all of Beuys’s work, “from his
understanding of drawing-­as-­thinking to his work with the invisible material of speech
in Honey Pump and the Free International University” (http://www.social-sculpture
.org/category/territory/influences/). For Beuys, thinking itself is a sculptural act — it
is morphogenetic; consequently, it is important to be accountable for the nature and
quality of one’s own thinking. Beuys maintained that the question “What can we
do?” should always be preceded by the question “How must we think?” His answer
to this question was the idea of social sculpture (Sacks ). That said, Beuys was
not operating in a vacuum. The pedagogical turn can also be seen to emerge from a
wide range of modern and contemporary artistic experimentations such as those of
the Dadaists and Russian Constructivists, the Bauhaus and Black Mountain College,
the Situationist International and Fluxus, among others (Bishop ; Podesva ;
Rogoff ). Information on the Copenhagen Free University is available at http://
www.copenhagenfreeuniversity.dk (last accessed September ) and the School of
Panamerican Unrest at http://pablohelguera.net//03/the-­school-­of-­panamerican
-­u nrest-­2/ (last accessed September ).
See Bourriaud (, ); Jackson (); Kester (, ); Kwon (); Lacy
(, ); Lippard.  These are books that I use as reference and teaching texts
to show which strains in contemporary art are those that I see as paving the way for
research-­creation to emerge as a university category; they do not fully map the expand-
ing fields of pedagogically, socially, or relationally oriented contemporary art.
stem is a well-­k nown acronym developed by the US National Science Foundation
to refer to a focus on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics across school
curricula. To “add art” is to turn stem into steam: science, technology, engineer-
ing, art, and mathematics. (Though what might be even better here is steams: add
social justice.)
On this, see also Smith. 



. Notes to Introduction
This problem is also being addressed in important ways by work in the digital hu-
manities on hypertextual formats for doctoral theses, in which organizations such as
hastac (Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Alliance and Collaboratory)
have long been involved.
As Henry Giroux () writes in his persuasive op-­ed piece in Truthout, “Not
only does neoliberalism undermine both civic education and public values and con-
fuse education with training, it also wages a war on what might be called the radical
imagination.”
There are many terms that have recently been developed as alternatives to the
Anthropocene. The term Capitalocene (Haraway ; Moore ) is often used to
point out the ways that the Anthropocene, with its generalizing anthropocentric focus,
masks the uneven work of capitalism, colonialism, and other interlocking systems of
domination. Other terms include Plantationocene, Chthulucene (Haraway ), Gy-
nocene (Demos ), and Planthroposcene (Myers b). See also Davis and Turpin
(); Kirksey (); Purdy (); Scranton (); and Stengers. 
The Athabasca oil sands take up roughly eighty-­seven thousand square miles of
Northern Alberta, an area only slightly smaller than the state of Florida, with a surface
mineable area six times as large as New York City and seventy-­eight times as large as
Manhattan Island. See Earth Observatory (n.d.).
These students include Leila Plouffe (who developed layered work on intra-­and
interspecies care for her  bfa graduating exhibition), Kyle Terrence and Aaron
Veldstra (who both worked to inhabit the contradictions of climate change in their 
and  mfa exhibition shows), Michael Woolley (who completed the first research-­
creation master’s degree housed specifically in the History of Art, Design, and Visual
Culture department at the University of Alberta, on the intersections of queer embodi-
ment, performance art, and its documentation), Ika Peraić (who is currently working
on a research-­creation PhD examining the ways that museums work with and variably
hold space for histories of genocide, focusing specifically on her homeland, Croatia,
and her current home, Canada), Brad Necyk (who is producing a research-­creation
PhD on neuroatypicality across the departments of Art and Design and Psychiatry),
and Jessie Beier (who is in the process of writing a research-­creation dissertation on
pedagogy’s “futurity” in the context of the Anthropocene). Leila Plouffe’s work “Self-­
Intra-­Multispecies Care” is available at the artist’s website.  Kyle Terrence’s
documentary work Pilgrimage and its associated images and analysis are available at
the artist’s website (Terrence, n.d.) and in the University of Alberta’s research archive
(Terrence ). Aaron Veldstra’s performance-­based installation Our Anaerobic Fu-
ture is discussed in Jans.  Michael Woolley’s full thesis and documentation of the
exhibition are available at the artist’s website.  Brad Necyk’s autoethnographic
research Alberta #3 can be found on the artist’s website (Necyk ). Jessie Beier’s




        Notes to Introduction        There’s No I in Me (or, “I Don’t Necessarily Agree with Everything I Say”) can be viewed
in its entirety in The Occulture (Occulture ).
The idea of a “wicked problem” comes from design studies. It refers to a problem
that is so sticky (incomplete, contradictory, emergent in its requirements) that it re-
quires multiple approaches, literacies, and forms to even begin to be addressed. It re-
quires multimodality (Rittel and Webber ).



Chapter 1: . 

1. These high-­profile lectures are cosponsored by cbc Radio, House of Anansi Press,
and Massey College at the University of Toronto.
2. Parrhesia, taken from the ancient Greek, is a kind of free speech, a “truth to power”
that is nonprescriptive, and as such can be taken as the basis of an ethics. Consult Fou-
cault’s six  lectures at the University of California, Berkeley (Foucault [] ).
3. As Ruha Benjamin puts it in “Black AfterLives Matter: Cultivating Kinfulness as
Reproductive Justice,” “Systems of domination require powerful narratives to allow
those who hoard resources to sleep at night” (, 58).
4. On touch and (multispecies) ethics, see Hayward.
5. See Eben Kirksey’s The Multispecies Salon () for a wide-­ranging edited volume
that takes this multispecies provocation seriously in the context of artistic forms and
practices.
6. In a similar vein, Melissa K. Nelson’s “Getting Dirty: The Eco Eroticism of Women
in Indigenous Oral Literatures” () tells stories of Star woman (2and Sky woman
(2digging, both refusing cautions, and both embodying the driven power of erotic,
feminist curiosity.
7. Haraway’s  breakout essay, “Manifesto for Cyborgs,” introduces the cyborg to
her readers as a “world-­changing fiction” ([], 1that, in its hybridity, its con-
fusion of boundaries, and its refusal to settle on one side of the binary, “is resolutely
committed to partiality, irony, intimacy, and perversity. It is oppositional, utopian, and
completely without innocence” (151). What Haraway invites us to consider, through
the figure of the naturecultural cyborg, is the degree to which our ways of organiz-
ing and categorizing the world in fact determine how we move through it, shaping the
stories we tell in the same breath as the stories we tell shape what we see of the world.
Echoing King’s contrasting of Native and Judeo-­Christian stories, Haraway invites us
to replace Oedipal narratives with cyborg ones ([] ). Whereas Oedipal (and
Judeo-­Christian) narratives carry with them the weight of the patriarchal order, cy-
borg ones are hybrid, impure, messy, and multiplicitous.




8. In this chapter, I make parallels between the drive to research-­creationalize the uni-
versity and the currently active Indigenization efforts (following the  final report
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada [trc ]) that are under
way within my own university and across the Canadian university system. These par-
allels are important. Both research-­creationalizing and Indigenizing projects point to
knowledges and ways of being that have been historically devalued and jettisoned from
the frames of legitimate university discourse. These parallels, however, have limits.
The research-­creation problems I write about are a function of the colonial university
landscape and make little sense from Indigenous perspectives (although many schol-
ars, such as Kim TallBear, Canada Research Chair in the Faculty of Native Studies at
the University of Alberta, work to bring them together in productive and allied ways).
The lands from which I currently write carry with them a particular obligation for
writers, like me, of settler descent. The university at which I teach has been a tool of
settler-­colonial expansion and part and parcel of the genocide of Indigenous knowl-
edges and practices. All of this matters deeply. And while I teach King, in my classes,
in the service of opening up our practices in the university, the specificity of the geno-
cides (of people and knowledges) out of which he speaks must be acknowledged and
recognized as a mattering of an entirely different magnitude.
9. Desire lines is a term from human geography that describes informal pathways caused
by human or animal traffic. The path usually represents the shortest or most easily
navigated route between point A and point B, one that differs from institutionally built
pathways, manifesting the “desire” of the population that uses it to traverse the space.
This orientation, of course, is common to many interdisciplinary approaches in
the arts and humanities. I remember it from my mfa training in conceptual art, where
we were asked to specify the issue that we wanted to address first and only then ask
which aesthetic form might serve the issue best: Performance? Intervention? Print?
Public sculpture? It is also something that I remember from my doctoral training in
the interdisciplinary humanities, where we were invited to bring together whichever
disciplinary literacies were needed to address our research question, with the only
caveat being that we chose those disciplinary tools that were really needed and took
the time to learn to use them well (enough), mobilizing an appropriate supervisory
committee able to assess the thesis in its disciplinary complexity. However, while such
interdisciplinary approaches are far from new in the fine arts, liberal arts, or humani-
ties, and research-­creation does indeed stand on the shoulders of these approaches, it
is not synonymous with them. My argument is that research-­creation, while aligned
with previous inter-­and transdisciplinary approaches, is doing something different to,
with, and in the university. Specifically, research-­creation pushes at these interdisci-
plinary logics by asking that multiple formal outputs be treated with equal value. I say
more on this in chapter 2.




Notes to Chapter. See Chapman and Sawchuk (); Kirk (); Mafe and Brown (); and Smith
and Dean. 
On emergence as an activist paradigm, see adrienne maree brown’s  Emergent
Strategy: Shaping Change, Changing Worlds.
Haraway’s use of eros is antithetical to the way that Freud develops the term in texts
such as Beyond the Pleasure Principle, where eros is tied to the life drives, binding not
undoing. The Aristotelian framework Haraway is drawing on here maps onto the psy-
choanalytic only if we read Haraway’s eros as aligned with the Freudian death drive
and agape with the Freudian life drives.
In the mode of “affinity, not identity” (Haraway [], 155), we might think
here as well of the psychoanalytic conception of working-through (Freud [] ).
In my case, I am hired as a contemporary art historian specializing in feminist and
performance art. I hold a PhD in the interdisciplinary humanities, with a dual special-
ization in feminist theory and the history of art and visual culture. I also hold an ma in
contemporary art history and theory and an mfa in interdisciplinary studio arts with
a specialization in conceptual and performance art. These graduate degrees set me up
with the credentials and skills to work as both an artist and an academic, but my hav-
ing been hired by my university as an art historian means that my academic output is
necessarily weighted more highly in my annual performance review. Other work is, of
course, looked at, but not recognized as equally significant professional output worthy
of reward in the form of advancement in status or salary. My colleagues in studio have
suggested that their experience is different—that they are rewarded with extra merit if
they produce academic work in addition to artistic. This remains anecdotal evidence,
but it speaks to an ideological assumption that dogs the field: to make art as an academic
is to dabble; to make academic work as an artist is to excel. This has everything to do
with the weighted values of “art making” and “history/theory making” in the academy.
When I proposed Debates in Art and/as Research as my graduate art history semi-
nar for the winter  term, and proposed to teach it research-­creationally (that is,
with final projects that took both written and artistic form), I was, due to the vision and
generosity of my department chair and colleagues, supported. That said, thanks to the
current structure of my home department, one that is organized by a division between
art (and design) practice and the history (and theory) of art and design, the seminar,
administratively, had to be offered for art history credit only.
While my thinking on this distinction is historically bound up with my first encoun-
ter with The Ethics of Psychoanalysis (Jacques Lacan’s seventh seminar; ), one need
only look to standard definitions in philosophy that specify ethics as structural (as in
“rules of conduct”) and morals as localized (as in “judgments of right or wrong”) to get
the distinction I am after here. In Lacan’s Ethics, the structural understanding of eth-
ics in classical philosophy becomes rerouted through the structural function of desire




. Notes to Chapter 1
in psychoanalysis. In short, psychoanalysis gives us a framework through which the
“personal” or “individual,” recast through the lens of the sinthome, can be understood
as a site of ethics. See Lacan’s seminar XXIII in particular, although seminars VII, XI,
and XX are also relevant here.
On artistic research as interdisciplinary praxis, see, among others, Hannula ();
Newbury (); and Wilson.  On research-­creation and multimodal modes of
publication, see Dronsfield (); Kozel (); Macleod and Holdridge (); and
Scrivener. 
See, among others Tuhiwai Smith.  In addition to noting the context of Indig-
enous erasure and dispossession, it is important to note that in academic adjudication
cultures many forms of now well-­established scholarship (feminist/antiracist) are still
regularly underfunded. Even when research-­creation is not involved, there is likely to
be disagreement as to what constitutes a meritorious research project. The issues with
research-­creation are not unique in this respect.
Simpson’s “oral companion” to her book is available through arp Books: http://arp
books.org/Books/I/Islands-­Of-­Decolonial-­Love; accessed September. While
Lorde’s book is not formally linked to audio or video recordings, many oral presenta-
tions of the speeches in the book can be found online.
As has been well documented and discussed in over three decades of writing on
the project, in Post-­Partum Document Kelly refuses “the mother,” within the project,
as a pregiven entity or biological given, instead insisting on “its social construction as
a representation of sexual difference within specific discourses” (Kelly, xxi). For
more information on Post-­Partum Document and bibliography, see Mary Kelly’s web-
site (Kelly n.d.). See also Loveless.
The essay draws on Myers’s A Dance a Day, https://adanceaday.wordpress.com/.
In conversation with the author, both Kelly and Myers resisted the terms of
research-­creation in response to these specific projects. For Kelly, this refusal (as I
understand it) has to do with serious commitment to the field of contemporary art
practice. For Myers, this refusal is based on an understanding of the requirements of
interdisciplinary responsibility. Without, at the time of initial writing (), having
taken the time to really know and learn and inhabit research-­creational literacies, de-
bates, and stakes, Myers was not willing to claim the work as research-­creation (though
we can see it as research-­creationally inclined, in much the same way that we can see
Kelly’s work as research-­creation avant la lettre). The critical insight here is that, as
with any knowledge-­making practice, especially when it is interdisciplinary, it matters
that we take care when mobilizing other knowledge places and spaces, approaching
with the humility of the visitor (see Stengers [] on visitation). Indeed, the humil-
ity of the visitor (the one who politely asks permission and understands themselves as
a guest, which, in the case of disciplines would mean taking the time to get to know




Notes to Chapter. what matters to the disciplinary spaces one is visiting) may be the best way to orient
ourselves when working interdisciplinarily.
In the essay, Penny links this understanding of deep interdisciplinarity to his expe-
rience developing (with Bill Tomlinson and Beatriz da Costa) and directing the influ-
ential Arts Computation Engineering (ace) program at the University of California,
Irvine (established in ).
I am not, with this invocation of the relation of form to content, suggesting anything
radically new. I am reminding us of the usefulness of applying insights that have come
before, specifically those of the interdisciplinary humanities and the conceptual fine
arts, to the research-­creational practices we are engaging in now. To invoke Hayden
White (), content emerges constitutively in and with form. To attend to form is to
attend to the power relations and propositional worldings implicit in how we do what we
do, in our research, our teaching, our publication, and our peer assessment.
I first learned about this work in a May  presentation by Chapman, “Ephemeral
Criteria: The Aura of the Art Form,” delivered at Les états généraux de la recherche-­
création: Enjeux politiques et éthiques, a conference inaugurating the first Canada
Research Chair in Research-­Creation awarded to Dr. Sophie Stévance at the Univer-
sité Laval (Quebec, Canada). This description was shared with me by Chapman in an
email exchange in September.
Da Costa was instrumental, from  to, in the development of the research-­
creational degree program ace at the University of California, Irvine, where she
was cross-­appointed (equally) between the department of art and the department of
engineering.
See da Costa’s  edited collection Tactical Biopolitics: Art, Activism, and Techno-
science, coedited with Kavita Philip. Da Costa also went on, after being awarded tenure
at uc Irvine, to begin a PhD in the History of Consciousness at uc Santa Cruz, under
the supervision of Donna Haraway. Her death, in, was a blow to many.
See da Costa.  The rest of her work is available at http://nideffer.net/shaniweb/.
On being undutiful as feminist praxis, see Gunkel, Nigianni, and Söderbäck. 
On the nomadic as feminist method, see Braidotti. 



Chapter 2: Discipline(s)

1. On this, see also Dany Nobus and Malcolm Quinn’s  Knowing Nothing, Staying
Stupid: Elements for a Psychoanalytic Epistemology.
2. Interdisciplinarity, traditionally conceived, “interlocks with the concerns of epis-
temology — the study of knowledge — and tends to be centered around problems and




. Notes to Chapter 1
issues that cannot be addressed or solved within the existing disciplines” (Moran,
emphasis added). Describing the use of the term discipline from the first half of the
fifteenth century onward, social and cultural historian Joe Moran writes: “ ‘Discipline’
in this context [began to suggest] a particular kind of moral training aimed at teaching
proper conduct, order and self-­control. In fact, the very notion of the term as a recog-
nized mode of learning implies the establishment of hierarchy and the operation of
power: it derives from the Latin, disciplina, which refers to the instruction of disciples
by their elders, and it necessarily alludes to a specialized, valued knowledge which
some people possess and others do not” (, 2). Also worth reading in this context
is literary and cultural theorist Marjorie Garber’s excellent Academic Instincts ()
and Patronizing the Arts. 
3. Bill Readings () does beautiful work with this “post-­’version of things in
chapter 9 of The University in Ruins. Making generative links to even earlier historical
moments, educational theorist Julie Thompson Klein, in a case study of the found-
ing of Harvard College, distinguishes two impulses at the heart of nineteenth-­and
twentieth-­century discussions of interdisciplinarity: a unifying or totalizing impulse
hearkening back to a well-­worn fantasy of Renaissance knowledge production (what
she calls a generalist position) and a historically situated, “problem-­oriented” approach
to addressing issues that necessarily cuts across disciplinary divides (, 4 – 5). It is
this latter that is of the most use to research-­creation, as I configure it in these pages.
4. Routine relationships between disciplines include those of proximity (for example,
“science and feminism,” a relation that maintains disciplinary division) and integra-
tion (“feminist science studies,” a model that reforms and revolutionizes disciplinary
boundaries). In these contexts, disciplinarity, for Readings, only becomes a problem to
the degree that its hierarchies are naturalized as given within our institutional struc-
tures, masking the often interdisciplinary basis of many a modern-­day disciplinary
locus, and working to synonymize interdisciplinarity with superficiality and discipli-
narity with scholarly seriousness.
5. I have been taught, in this, by many years of conversation with art historian and
visual and performance studies scholar Catherine Soussloff. See Catherine Soussloff
and Mark Franko’s  essay “Visual and Performance Studies: A New History of In-
terdisciplinarity.” The article discusses the histories to which this chapter refers, focus-
ing on the resistances to interdisciplinary innovation that the authors experienced in
the late s, trying to get an interdisciplinary Visual and Performance Studies PhD
off the ground at their (then) home university (University of California, Santa Cruz).
6. As well as being doubled through video and photographic documents, while lectur-
ing, Woolley wore a GoPro camera headset that was trained on the audience and a
contact microphone on his chest. The former documented the direction in which his
head was pointed (at us) and the latter was wired to an amplifier so that we could hear,
as he spoke, his bodily fluctuations (e.g., elevated heartbeat, etc.). The full thesis and
documentation of the exhibition are available at the artist’s website (www.mjhw.ca).


 Notes to Chapter. 7. Importantly, Woolley came to the department with a previous career as a profes-
sional photographer. The disciplinary knowledge to work at a high level in photog-
raphy, over the course of his thesis, through study, also extended to video and perfor-
mance. He was therefore well placed to make the request to research-­creationalize
his thesis.
8. I challenge this disempowering and mostly incorrect (although ideologically lasting)
caricature of academic labor production in “Practice in the Flesh of Theory”. 
9. TallBear and Bear’s ongoing Tipi Confessions project works to unsettle the strangle-
hold of what Scott Morgensen () terms settler sexuality and highlight our under-
standing of the university as a settler-­colonial, heteropatriarchal institution (in which
the project of only letting certain forms and renderings of knowledge count shores up
the genocidal logics of colonialism). Information on the project is available at TallBear
().
Peers’s work, individually and with CRIPSiE, can be further explored on their web-
site (www.daniellepeers.com).
Poubellication is a contraction of garbage can (poubelle in French) and publication
that indicates the way that traditional written publications render, for Lacan, the “lived
word” lifeless. Lacan infinitely preferred the spoken seminar, and understood this as
the true site of knowledge-­made-­public: knowledge produced in situated, respon-
sive contexts with others. As read through scholars such as Gregory Ulmer (),
we might see Lacan as a thinker, in this way, for the dialogic turn and take him as a
research-­creational ally avant la lettre, setting him, as Ulmer does, alongside social
sculptural artist and theorist Joseph Beuys. See also Malcolm Bowie’s Lacan. 
The metrics I refer to include “customer service” student evaluations, evidence of
“impact” in the form of bibliometrics, and evidence of popularity in the form of media
invitations.
See Avery Gordon’s Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination
() for a wonderful sociologically grounded exposition of the uncanny as a pro-
ductive form of haunting.
Relevant here, in the context of conceptualizing what it might mean to fail well, is
Jack Halberstam’s  The Queer Art of Failure, which argues against heteronormative,
capitalist frameworks for understanding success. In ways very much aligned with my
perspectives in this book, Halberstam makes a claim for “eccentric archives,” “low”
rather than “high” theory, and “failure” as a site of political resistance.
Psychoanalytically speaking, ambivalence is understood as the simultaneous ex-
istence of contradictory tendencies in relation to a single object (Freud [] ).
What constitutes true ambivalence is that affirmation and negation are simultaneous
and inseparable.




Freud’s wonderful short essay “Wild Psychoanalysis” ([] ) comes to mind
here.
In an interview published in The Anxiety of Interdisciplinarity (“Institutional Inter-
disciplinarity in Theory and Practice: An Interview with Alexia Defert”), the femi-
nist philosopher Julia Kristeva highlights a tension between an interdisciplinarity
considered along a “theory-­t heory” axis and one articulated between “practice and
theory.” While Kristeva argues that the latter (practice <> theory) carries with it an
acute risk of incompetence possible when the skills of one discipline prove insuffi-
cient in another, she nonetheless maintains the political and pedagogical importance
of taking such risks as a way of nurturing “the emergence of frictions and not their
obliteration” (, 17).
Key edited volumes gathering these voices together are listed on share’s web-
site (share n.d.). See also Candy (); Le Coguiec and Gosselin (); Macleod
and Holdridge (); Busch (); Buckley and Conomos (); Cools and Slager
(); Kester (); Béland and Paquin (); Beier and Wallin (); Salter ();
Stévance and Lacasse (); Smith. 
Although, as outlined in the introduction, other institutions, such as Western
University (formerly the University of Western Ontario, Canada), have introduced
programs in which a PhD in Art and Visual Culture loosely follows Frayling’s three
streams.
The Communication Studies Department at Concordia University (Montreal),
where both Chapman and Sawchuk are located, supports media-­based work that crosses
practice/theory lines in the form of research-­creation mas and PhDs. Research-­
creation is, at the time of writing, not institutionally supported (i.e., through degree
streams) in the Faculty of Fine Arts at Concordia, but remains the purview of the Fac-
ulty of Social Sciences and of interdisciplinary units on campus. It is in this context
that, in their essay, Chapman and Sawchuk argue against “art” as the privileged loca-
tion for research-­creation in favor of interdisciplinary programs of research, outside
the fine arts proper, that adopt arts-­based methods within academic research frame-
works. My arguments here are strongly aligned with theirs. I, too, would like to see
research-­creation adopted as a methodology throughout the university, so that the
ways that it might manifest in a communication studies and media department would
be distinct from how it would be articulated in the fine arts, and different again from
how it would be pursued in art history or anthropology or sociology. In this respect, we
could imagine the impact of research-­creation on the university as akin to the impact
of feminist, queer, and critical race studies: something that (ideally) weaves its way
through the curriculum of most departments across campus.
Wittgenstein’s notion of family resemblances is most strongly developed in his post-
humously published book Philosophical Investigations ([] ).




also Myers (a, c).
Indeed, Chapman and Sawchuk’s text suggests two quite radical things by offer-
ing us these different valences for research-­creation. First, it suggests an approach to
research-­creation in which Frayling’s last category (research-­through-­creation) could
be reconfigured in order to grant doctoral degree status to the production of artwork
not accompanied by a substantial written component without thereby having to grant,
as Frayling is rightfully concerned with, the “entire history of art... a postgraduate
research degree” (, 5). Second, Chapman and Sawchuk’s categories work to make
Frayling’s first category — “historical, philosophical, and/or aesthetic research into an
art or design object, period, process, or issue” — inhospitable, leaving no place within
research-­creational discourse for the traditional art historical dissertation, no room
for the tried-­a nd-­true disciplinary divide (ventriloquized by Frayling [, 5] in his
text) that would say, on the one side, art must speak for itself or, on the other, that art
cannot speak for itself. (Of course, this latter is, itself, an ideological caricature, but a
caricature with staying power, as my experiences with incoming graduate students in
art history, studio art, and design practice attest.)



Chapter 3: Polydisciplinamory

1. Coined by Marianne Pieper and Robin Bauer in, mononormativity refers to the
institution of compulsory monogamy, not to monogamous practices.
2. Notable here is Angela Willey’s  Undoing Monogamy: The Politics of Sci-
ence and the Possibilities of Biology. See also Barker and Langdridge (); and the
 special issue of the journal Sexuality (9, no. 5) on polyamory; and Kim TallBear’s
important work as The Critical Polyamorist (www.criticalpolyamorist.com). Philo-
sophically informed essays on the topic include Emens (); Overall (); and
Weaver and Woollard. 
3. As Lauren Berlant and Michael Warner remind us in “What Does Queer Theory
Teach Us about X?”: “Pedagogy has long involved the formation of identities and sub-
jectivities, radical in the aspiration to live another way now, here.... There is an aca-
demic stage and... its protocols and properties have maintained an invisible hetero-
normativity, one that infiltrates our profession [and] our knowledge” (, . – 49).
Similarly, David Halperin reminds us that before queer theory became the darling of
many an academic stage, feminist and gay/lesbian studies “were motivated first and
foremost by an impulse to transform what could count as knowledge, as well as by a
determination to transform the practices by which knowledge functioned within the
institution of the university” (, 343).




4. See Sullivan () for a lucid and general introduction to queer theory; and both
Britzman () and Luhmann () for incisive readings of the queer as pedagogical
intervention. Also relevant here are analyses of bisexuality that have been applied to
theoretical and pedagogical norms; see Hemmings. 
5. Given the liberatory language that often surrounds research-­creation and the way
that this rhymes with decades of writing within queer pedagogical circles on the de-
naturalization of normative, reproductive codes of pedagogy (what I outlined in the
previous chapter as Freire’s “banking model of education” in which the aim of the
pedagogical scene is the transferring of information from one body [a teacher’s] to
another [a student’s] in a way that is repeatable, verifiable, and that functions to se-
cure a mode of academic-­patrilineal reproduction), it seems surprising to me that
there has been little writing on the queering of research-­creation and its synonyms.
One example that I have found is Dallas J. Baker’s “Queering Practice-­Led Research:
Subjectivity, Performative Research and the Creative Arts” (); Baker applies a
queer Foucauldian analysis to a practice-­led research method. While I have been hard
pressed to find theoretical analyses of the queerness of research-­creation, I have come
across many research-­creational projects that take the queer as content. Examples in-
clude McLeod, Rault, and Cowan (); and Deirdre Logue and Allyson Mitchell’s
 single-­channel video Hers Is Still a Dank Cave: Crawling Toward a Queer Horizon,
which I discuss below as an homage to research-­creation.
6. See also, in this context, feminist critiques of the institution of marriage (such
as Gayle Rubin’s charge to “recognize the political dimensions of erotic life” [,
310]); the writings of noted anarchists such as Emma Goldman; the commune move-
ment’s critique of the family, monogamy, and private property (Klesse a, b;
Portwood-­Stacer ; Shannon and Willis ); as well as Bell and Binnie ()
and Berlant () on heterosexual structures of intimacy; and Lorde ([]) )
on the erotic as power.
7. On the diachronic/synchronic and metaphoric/metonymic in psychoanalysis, see
Lacan (); and Gallop. 
8. On this, see especially Morgensen (, ). For more on allied Indigenous sexu-
alities, see TallBear (); and Yamashiro. 
9. On this, see Anapol (); Easton and Hardy (); Lano (); Munson and Stel-
boum (); Nearing (); and in the second wave, Anderlini-­D’Onofrio ();
Ravenscroft. 
These relational and kinship ties can be variously articulated. For example, a triad
is three people who are in an equal relationship with each other (see the  – present
television show You, Me, Her for a mainstream dramatization of this form). One person
with two partners who are not each other’s lovers is a “V.” A quad names four folks in
an equal relationship. And a pod is the name for a group of people who identify as in




             Notes to Chapter. relationship with each other, but how these relationships are organized varies. Poly­
fidelity refers to a group commitment where the members (triad, quad, or pod) only en-
gage in intimacy and sexual relations with each other (with new partners—primary or
secondary—only brought in with group consensus). Often, because of the strict
boundaries placed on the relationships thus described, polyfidelity becomes under-
stood as a poly “good” that is held in contradistinction to sex for pleasure (promiscuity/
swinging). Arguing against the binary of dishonest-­poly-­for-­sex versus honest-­poly-­
for-­love — a binary that attempts to tame and render safe the poly project — cultural
studies scholar Christian Klesse asserts that “a representational politics based upon a
distinction between the ‘good polyamorist’ and the ‘bad swinger’ or the ‘promiscuous
queer’ hampers the potential of polyamory discourses for the grounding of a truly plu-
ralistic sexual ethics that may embrace the diversity of non-­monogamous sexual and
intimate practices” (a, 566).
See Loveless  for an extended engagement with the structure of anecdote as it
is developed by Gallop.
For a wonderful foray through philosophical and psychoanalytic understandings
of love, as well as a deep investigation of Lacan’s seminar VIII (On Transference), see
Bruce Fink’s  Lacan on Love.
Some key quotations: “Whenever this function [the sujet supposé savoir] may be,
for the subject, embodied in some individual, whether or not an analyst, the transfer-
ence... is established” (Lacan [], 235); “If transference often manifests itself
under the appearance of love, it is first and foremost the love of knowledge that is con-
cerned” (Evans, 214); “Transference is the attribution of knowledge to the other,
the supposition that the other is a subject who knows” (Evans, 214); “I cannot fail
to underline the new resonance with which this notion of knowledge is endowed. The
person in whom I presume knowledge to exist thereby acquires my love” (Lacan []
, 64). Transference, in this context, is not just affect displaced anywhere, anyhow,
but affect displaced onto a perceived location of authority — an authority bound up
with the production of knowledge, with the ability to say “I know.” Transference, here,
functions as a conduit for the past to entangle itself in the present through that projec-
tion onto the sujet supposé savoir — the teacher, the analyst — that is needed for the
pedagogical/analytic scene to work.
Working-through is a psychoanalytic concept that refers to the working-through of
resistances. The practice of working-through, as Freud formulates it in “Remember-
ing, Repeating and Working-­T hrough” ([] ), allows the subject to accept re-
pressed elements and loosen the grip of the repetition compulsion. In this essay, Freud
outlines the fundamental aspects of psychoanalytic treatment as (1) working-through,
(2) recollection of repressed memories, and (3) the repetition that occurs in the trans-
ference. Important here is that we understand that repression is not overcome once the
resistance of the ego has been overcome. Instead, unconscious resistance, that which



. Notes to Chapter 3
emerges in the repetition compulsion, has to be addressed through a working that is a
working through and with, not against or beyond.
Speaking to the power of neologism, Ani Ritchie and Meg Barker () suggest
that our current terrain of affective languages within romantic relationships is always
already formulated within the confines of a mononormative worldview: “Constructing
jealousy as a ‘negative’ emotion whilst describing it as a ‘natural’ response to infidel-
ity, serves to maintain the dominance of monogamy, which in turn has been argued
to maintain systems of patriarchy” (586). New words can open up new worlds. For ex-
ample, within poly communities it is not uncommon to encounter the use of the word
wibbly to speak to an experience of possessive anxiety and to request reassurance in a
way that doesn’t marshal the negative connotations of jealousy (594). Similarly, poly
terms such as compersion create a realm of possibility for positive affects associated
with seeing one’s partner with one’s metamour (one’s partner’s partner) — affects that
are not left to be described only by their inverse, e.g., not-­jealous (which doesn’t speak
to pleasure, but rather to lack of displeasure). “Rewriting the language of identity, re-
lationships and emotion,” Ritchie and Barker claim, “can enable alternative ways of
being” (596).
As Heather Love, in the catalogue essay on Mitchell and Logue’s work, writes, “If
practice presents an alternative to ‘traditional quantitative and qualitative scholarly
research methods,’ it always raises the question of what kind of knowledge intimacy
can yield” (,. – 48).
In conversation, the artists stated that their filming pursued “a narrative of de-
sire,” each choice for what to shoot and how to shoot it coming from love. Specifi-
cally, they cite their love for the s feminist arts-­and-­crafts aesthetic that dominates
the work, and the way that they tried to situate the discourse of each text through its
aesthetic—to literally crawl inside of each book (personal communication, May ).



Chapter 4: Drive(s)

1. Méconnaissance translates as “misrecognition,” specifically, here, of the sujet’s struc-
tural position within the analytic scene.
2. Early on in the lectures Lacan tells his listeners, “It is not mere chance... if this very
week I have received a copy of the newly published, posthumous work of my friend
Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, Le visible et l’invisible” ([], 71). Lacan, having re-
ceived Le visible et l’invisible in the week before delivering his first lecture on the gaze,
outlines for his audience his approval of the work of Merleau-­Ponty’s student Claude
Lefort in felicitously putting together this unfinished work, and notes a crucial shift in
Merleau-­Ponty’s work marked by this posthumous text: Merleau-­Ponty’s conception
of the flesh, as developed particularly in Merleau-­Ponty’s last chapter, “The Chiasm —




   Notes to Chapter. The Intertwining.” Lacan’s development of the objet petit a in these lectures is in direct
conversation with Merleau-­Ponty’s conception of the flesh. Lacan is clear in his sugges-
tion that in Merleau-­Ponty’s unfinished work, particularly in the notes that follow the
last chapter of The Visible and the Invisible, there are “reference points” for the reader
of the psychoanalytic unconscious. These reference points, for Lacan, suggest a pro-
foundly original direction of thought being articulated in relation to the philosophical
tradition, one that Lacan reads as consonant with the structure (the objet petit a) that
he is at work unpacking (Lacan [], 82).
3. This is something that Lacan was, of course, famously concerned with in the wake
of the May . protests. See Russell Grigg’s  translation of Lacan’s Seminar XVII:
The Other Side of Psychoanalysis and Justin Clemens and Russell Grigg’s  edited
collection Jacques Lacan and the Other Side of Psychoanalysis: Reflections on Seminar
XVII.
4. Lacan’s lectures on the gaze as objet petit a have, of course, been glossed and read ad
infinitum, within feminist film theory in particular, in the years since they were given.
Some germinal texts in this lineage include Copjec (); Kaplan (); and Mulvey
(). See also de Lauretis (); Neale (); among others (too many to count!).
5. Tom Waits, “San Diego Serenade,” from the album The Heart of Saturday Night
().
6. Lacan links the objet petit a at the heart of this Wiederholungszwang to two figures,
the tuché and the automaton, terminology borrowed from Aristotle. With this, Lacan
perverts Aristotle’s notion of tuché (as bound to agents of rational choice, like Har-
away’s agape) by aligning the power of the chance encounter to the encounter with the
unmetabolizable signifier—a kernel of the Real that will soon, in his text, be named ob-
jet petit a. Automaton signifies the network of signifiers, the realm of the Symbolic, and
the building blocks of human meaning-making, while tuché designates an encounter
with the Real that can only ever be outside symbolization, like the m/Other’s body in
little Ernst’s game of fort/da. Straddling the two — the tuché and the automaton — the
objet petit a, “that object around which the drive moves” (Lacan [], 257), is
symbolized by little Ernst’s reel, being thrown away and brought back, compulsively,
repetitively. Additionally, in choosing these two words, tuché and automaton, to ground
his discussion of repetition compulsion, Lacan reminds us of the relationship between
Freud’s Beyond the Pleasure Principle and his essay on “The Uncanny” — two texts that
were written at the same time, although published years apart, and that benefit from
being read together. For an excellent discussion of the repetition compulsion and the
uncanny, see Hertz.  See also Royle () for a speculative reading of Beyond the
Pleasure Principle and “The Uncanny” as uncanny doubles of each other.
7. Within the Lacanian anatomy, desire and drive are distinguished on the basis of
their respective relations to the Real, making the turn from an ethics of desire to an
ethics of the drive or the Real a contested one. If desire was Lacan’s central reference



. Notes to Chapter 4
point in his “Ethics of Psychoanalysis” of  – it is jouissance that comes to occupy
center stage in his later seminars. It is on this basis that it is argued, variably, by Phil-
lip Dravers (), Jacques-­A lain Miller (), Slavoj Žižek ([] ), and Alenka
Zupančič (), that while the earlier Lacan subscribes to an ethics of desire, the later
Lacan can be said to subscribe to an ethics of the drive. As I understand it, the point
here is that desire passes over into drive when it understands itself as having no final
term, when it ceases to aim to attain. On this topic, see also de Lauretis (); and
Edelman. 
8. The poem is surrealist poet Louis Aragon’s “Contre-­Chant,” translated in the 
publication in English as: “In vain your image comes to meet me / And does not enter
me where I am who only shows it / Turning towards me you can find / On the wall of
my gaze only your dreamt-­of shadow / I am that wretch comparable with mirrors /
That can reflect but cannot see / Like them my eye is empty and like them inhabited /
By your absence which makes them blind” (Lacan [], 17).
9. And here I must take a moment, “off topic” myself as it were, to cite Clare Hem-
mings’s Why Stories Matter: The Political Grammar of Feminist Theory (), a book
that I read the year after I completed my PhD, and then promptly put down to attend
to the vicissitudes of early motherhood and the job market. In a beautiful moment of
chance, just as I prepared to send the penultimate draft of this book to the publisher, a
student asked to borrow something on a shelf I had not looked at in many a year. And
there was Hemmings’s book. My mouth opened. Wide. I grabbed it and took it home.
It seems that I had had an interlocutor there, all along, one not realized consciously,
but who must have been driving me under the surface. With Hemmings’s call, in that
text, for “the importance of telling stories differently,” in ways that are both ethically
accountable and politically transformative (2), it is hard not to think so. While Hem-
mings’s field of address is at an angle to mine, when she asks us to experiment with
“how we might tell stories differently rather than telling different stories” (16), I can’t
help but feel an unpayable debt to her and all the other feminist thinkers who have
impacted and formed me over the years, in ways that I can’t even begin to account for,
but that, rather, erupt unexpectedly to remind me of those I’ve crossed paths with and
momentarily forgotten, but that nonetheless have indelibly shaped me.
Lacan writes, “There is a causal element in this division [of the subject], and it is
what I call objet petit a.... It is closely related to the structure of desire. At all events,
this objet petit a is in the very place where that singular phallic absence is revealed, at
the root of what I have tried here to put in the center because it is the center of the ana-
lytic experience, namely what I, like everyone else, call castration” (, 53).
See Lacan’s Seminar XI ([], 168).
We might recall here the role of the eye in the Freudian uncanny, specifically the
relation between the loss of one’s eyes (as symbolic of the power to see, and scope out,
the world around us) and the conceptual figure of castration, as symbolic of the insuf-



   Notes to Chapter. ficiency or lack of mastery that constitutes the psychoanalytic subject (the loss of the
phallus as organizing principle of a phallogocentric social order). As Samuel Weber puts
it in The Legend of Freud, “Eyes are the bodily organ to which the expectation of bodily
unity is traditionally attached. What can be seen with one’s ‘own two eyes’ can be identi-
fied” (, emphasis added), and it is in this context that “if castration anxiety has a
structural significance for psychoanalysis, it is to the extent that it returns to haunt the
story the subject would like to tell itself in order to confirm its self-­identity as an ‘I’” (16).
Linked to the realm of knowledge-­as-­certain-­k nowledge, the image here, Lacan tells
us, is determined by a point-­by-­point relation. Anamorphosis as illustrative of this func-
tion is organized by the correspondence of straight lines — it can be mapped in space
in a mathematical relation that is not visual as such: Light is not central to geometral
vision because it always amounts to the situating of two points along the imagined line
of a single thread. For Lacan, then, what is at stake in the realm of the image, the realm
of geometral perspective, is the mapping not of sight but of space ([], — a
mapping that can as easily be produced haptically as optically. On haptic visuality, see
Marks.
Here my thinking is informed by Judith Butler who writes of Merleau-­Ponty’s work
on the chiasm as an attempt “in a certain way to offer an alternative to the erotics of
simple mastery. It makes thinking passionate, because it overcomes, in its language
and in its argument, the distinction between a subject who sees and one who is seen, a
subject who touches and one who is touched. It does not, however, overcome the dis-
tinction by collapsing it” (, 194).
David Morris, discussing Merleau-­Ponty’s philosophy of perception, writes (ven-
triloquizing Merleau-­Ponty): “We think we already know how to see, and that we seers
are thus wholly active in our seeing. The painter knows this is not true. We must look
in order to see, and the painter knows that she does not yet know how to look so as to
see the thing as it shows itself. So she lets things teach her how to look” (, 1em-
phasis added).
I am thinking here of Lacan’s work on James Joyce as sinthome in his Seminar
XXIII. For a beautiful exposition of Ettinger’s theory in relation to her artwork, see
Kinsella.



Conclusion: Art at the End of the World

1. Dr. Strangelove, once it seems clear that the “tipping point” has passed, argues for the
immediate evacuation (into the “mines”) of a cross section of the human race, chosen
for skills needed to rebuild civilization materially as well as procreatively: virility for
men and sexual desirability for women, with a six-­to-­one female-­to-­male ratio (!) being
suggested as ideal for repopulation.




. Notes to Chapter 4
2. “Tipi Confessions: Sex at the End of the World” was held on October 30,, at the
Needle Vinyl Tavern in Edmonton, AB; “Teaching at the End of the World: Weird
Pedagogy and Speculative Futures” is the working title of Beier’s PhD dissertation in
the Faculty of Education at the University of Alberta; and Taylor’s Social Justice at the
End of the World is a special issue of the journal Societies and is forthcoming.
3. This is a perspective shared by many who mobilize end-­of-­the-­world language. Chal-
lenging the settler-­colonial underpinning of commonplace end-­of-­the-­world narra-
tives, TallBear forcefully reminds her listeners that “I come from a people who have
already seen the end of the (their) world” (TallBear ). On the intersection of petro-
capitalism and social justice, see Sheena Wilson’s  “Energy Imaginaries: Feminist
and Decolonial Futures”; and her  “Gendering Oil: Tracing Western Petro-­Sexual
Relations.”
4. I am thinking here of perspectives such as those presented by James Lovelock in his
 Newsweek interview with James Fergusson under the provocative title “Saving the
Planet Is a Foolish Romantic Extravagance.”
5. “It’s the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)” is a  song by the rock
band R.E.M.
6. See the University of Alberta’s Marketing and Communications Toolkit, “What Is
Our Promise,” for an example of how these slogans are used by the university (Uni-
versity of Alberta, n.d.).
7. In this, as ever, I am taught by the thinking and writing of science fiction scholar Sha
LaBare. 
8. “Where Id was, there shall Ego be” / “Where it was, there shall I be” (Freud []
; Lacan [] ).
9. For the notion of participatory dissent, I am indebted to both Chantal Mouffe ()
and Ewa Plonowska Ziarek.  I have also written on the term in “A Manifesto on
Bitterness as a Foundation for the Social”. 
Here, the ethical question we must ask of all cultural production (to borrow Des­
pret’s [] idiom) is: What are we being rendered capable of (by this action, interven-
tion, invitation, reading)? I am taught in this by feminist philosopher Maria Puig de la
Bellacasa, who, in her Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds,
asks how caring practices might encourage and support different kinds of hope, mod-
est forms of hope that resist being turned into that kind of denialism that allows us
to keep doing things as we are doing them and simply add new technical innovation
into the mix. She writes, “A politics of care engages much more than a moral stance, it
involves affective, ethical and hands-­on agencies of practical consequence” (, 7).
