  Haraway’s curiosity, in The Companion Species Manifesto, driven by
her “companion” questions, pulls her into the telling of three stories in
particular, each with its own narrative arc: first, a story of species-­time
(human-­canine coevolution); second, a story of breed-­time (the Austra-
lian Shepherd as an instrument of colonial expansion); third, a story of
phenomenological-­time (her specific agility training relations with Cay-


enne and Roland, two dogs with whom she was living and loving at the
time of her writing). Haraway tells these three story-­arcs as provocations
that model her situated attempts to “cobble together” practices of liv-
ing ethically with significant others, others with whom our differences
emerge as significant — for example, the kinds of alien differences that
emerge at the intersections between species (Haraway, 7). Attentive
to the histories and presents at stake when the question “Whom and what
do I touch when I touch my dog?” is taken seriously, Haraway suggests
that to “find arguments and stories that matter to the worlds we might
yet live in” (3) we must investigate, with the curiosity of she-­who-­does-­
not-­already-­k now, the material-­semiotic entanglements, the “worldliness”
out of which each of us, at any given moment, emerges. Curiosity, here,
emerges as key to the political capacity of stories to remake worlds and is
the kind of curiosity that also figures prominently The Truth about Stories.
    Contrasting what he calls “scientific, capitalistic, Judeo-­Christian” cre-
ation stories with “Native” creation stories (, 12), King tells his reader-­
listeners that “contained within creation stories are relationships that help
define the nature of the universe and how cultures understand the world
in which they exist” (10). One of the first of these stories is the story of
Charm, who creates the world cooperatively with nonhuman others, al-
most, it seems, by accident. The story begins with Charm digging a hole so
deep that she falls through it, and through space, until she lands on a Pan-
gean version of Earth. She was warned of course (by Badger) not to dig
too deep — not to be too curious. But she cannot help it. She digs and digs,
her curiosity getting the better of her. That said, rather than a possessive
division between “her” and “her curiosity,” the driven version of curios-
ity that King ascribes to Charm takes over her very sense of self such that
her actions are no longer volitional but are constitutive: she doesn’t make
them; they make her. And it is in this way that Charm’s curiosity becomes
what King calls the “dangerous” kind (, 10–— the kind of curi-
osity that gets one into (methodological/ontological/epistemological/
disciplinary) trouble.
    It is just such a curiosity that, taught by Haraway and King, I would
like to claim as central to the approach to research-­creation for which this
book argues.
    King’s and Haraway’s perspectives, while speaking with seriousness
to histories of genocide that have given us this world, can also be taken as


            tices in the university, practices that structurally privilege certain modes
of knowing, certain stories about knowledge production and dissemina-
tion, and not others. Standing on the shoulders of this assertion, what
I suggested to my students in Debates in Art and/as Research, is that
reading The Companion Species Manifesto and The Truth about Stories not
only for their content, but for the worldviews that they model through the
narrative and poetic forms that they mobilize, helps us to understand the
power of stories as something that emerges not only at the level of content
but that of form. Both authors implicitly insist that to do research —of any
kind—is not simply to ask questions; it is to let our curiosities drive us and
allow them to ethically bind us; it is to tell stories and to pay attention not
only to which stories we are telling and how we are telling them, but how
they, through their very forms, are telling us.
    At the end of his book, echoing many a poststructuralist theorist, King
draws on the words of poet and novelist Jeanette Winterson to assert that
language is not something we speak; it speaks us (King, 2). Languages
(discourses) precede us; research methods and disciplines precede us. We
enter into them and they work to craft the possible forms of our questions.
Thus, when examining our research practices, it is crucial to ask: which
stories are animating our choices? Why might this research choice mat-
ter? Alternate (research) stories create alternate (research) worlds. Con-
versely, different storytelling strategies (methods and practices) emerge
from different worldviews and commitments. If we understand our re-
search in the university as the production of a set of interlocking stories
that are, indeed and ideally, world-­changing fictions (Haraway [],
149)7 — interventions, micro though any one intervention might be, into
the givens that organize our social and material worlds — the next logi-
cal, research-­creational, pedagogical, step is this: to open the university
up not only to different writerly vocalities, as decades of feminist, literary,
Indigenous, critical race, deconstructive, and performance studies (the
list goes on) scholars have done, but also to different tangible forms (for
example, a song, beadwork, a performance, or a video installation) as valid
modes of rendering research public.8
    It is with this in mind that I proposed to my students the following —
slightly opaque — provocation as central to research-­creation in its strong
form: the crafting of a research question is the crafting of a story that is also


the crafting of an ethics. Following this, in a room full of students who self-­
identified as art historians and artists (along with a few sociologists and
performance studies students), I, perhaps even more provocatively, pro-
posed research-­creation as a methodology that, therefore, necessarily side-
steps disciplinary allegiance. That is, I suggested that rather than letting
our research questions be conditioned by the structures of legibility and
value given by, say, one’s self-­identifications as painter, or early modern art
historian, or feminist theorist, we take seriously King’s call to tell stories
differently and pair this with our own versions of the questions that Ha-
raway asks herself: “Whom and what do I touch when I touch my dog?”
and “How is ‘becoming with’ a practice of becoming worldly?” (, 3).
    Throughout the semester, “Haraway’s dog” then became our touch-
stone for developing research approaches and orientations. Sometimes
this appeared as a question from one student to another: “So... what is
your dog?”; sometimes as a description within the classroom setting: “For
my final project I’ve chosen ‘desire lines on campus’ as my dog; I’m ask-
ing: ‘Whom and what do I traverse when I follow the desire lines across
our campus fields?’”9 Together we discovered that to frame a research
question in this way helped to unpin it from a primarily disciplinary ori-
entation; to frame research in this way foregrounded the researcher’s po-
sitionality and moved beyond primary accountability to a specific disci-
pline while still keeping the door open to discipline-­specific knowledges.
Simply put, it placed the curiosity-­driven question first. What these texts
modeled for us was an approach to research rooted in process, multiplic-
ity, context specificity, and contingency — one that might even be called
emergent.
    In The Companion Species Manifesto, Haraway writes: “The obligation
is to ask who are present and who are emergent.... Situated emergence
of more livable worlds depends on that differential sensibility” . – 51;
emphasis added). This term — emergent — is peppered throughout Com-
panion Species, and it is often paired with symbiogenesis. The terms rhyme
conceptually. While symbiogenesis, forwarded by the evolutionary theo-
rist Lynn Margulis ([] ), speaks to the relational origin of organ-
isms (an understanding of the contested distinction species as emerging
through symbiosis rather than mutation), emergence describes an aggre-
gate property of elements, none of which demonstrate that property in-
herently within them. Water, in its liquid form, and snowflakes, as specific


            (molecular) levels below. Water is emergent. So are snowflakes.
     Emergence is relevant to research-­creation not only because it is a recur-
ring descriptor in writing on research-­creation and its synonyms—which
it i. — but because it refigures disciplinary research objects in ways that
invite us to think interdisciplinarity-­as-­emergence: as productive of out-
puts that exceed what is demonstrably present in their constituent parts.
An approach to research modeled on emergence insists on the complex-
ity of lived histories and worlds, and on the difficulty of accounting for
and responding to such complexity. It also insists on recognizing that
this complexity is not simply a failure that adequate perspective — the ca-
pacity to somehow see better — might correct (what Haraway has called
a God trick [, 582], the view of everything from nowhere), but rather
that complexity is the name of the game, whether we are talking turtles
(King ), elephants (Haraway, 12), or metaplasm (54); it is “sto-
ries about stories, all the way down.”
     The political practice of working with and through stories “all the way
down,” of telling and retelling and weaving and reweaving, is far from po-
litically neutral; it is also far from affectively neutral. In both the content
and form of her text, Haraway models the “grain” of a research practice
attentive to what I will call love. The love at stake, however, in the terms
of Haraway’s text, is more akin to eros than agape (, 99). If agape fig-
ures a knowing in general — so-­called unconditional love — eros figures
something that is conditional (in the sense of being situated) and that is
both critically unknown and unknowable (in the sense of being emergent):
“Just who is at home must be permanently in question. The recognition
that one cannot know the other or the self, but must ask in respect for all of
time who and what are emerging in relationship, is the key” (50).
     This distinction between eros and agape can be clarified further
through one of Haraway’s key questions, which emerges toward the end
of her Companion Species, as she reflects on the imperative of her guiding
questions regarding whom and what she touches when she touches her
dogs Roland and Cayenne. Haraway asks, “Beyond the personal, simple
fact of joy in time and work with my dogs, why do I care? Indeed, in a world
full of so many urgent ecological and political crises, how can I care?” (61).
Understood at the level of agape, of love “in general,” Haraway’s love of her
dogs is apolitical. If eros figures the love at stake, however, we are telling a



different story. In a way that I will expand on when we turn to the psycho-
analytic frame of reference and the objet petit a in chapter four (and that
echoes Audre Lorde’s ([] ) work “The Uses of the Erotic: The
Erotic as Power” to which I will also return), the how of Haraway’s caring
must be erotic in order for it to be ethical.
    Haraway’s book (as does King’s, in a different idiom) implicitly argues
that it is in allowing ourselves to be drawn by our loves, our intensive and
extensive curiosities, attentive to what and whom we are driven to explore,
and examining the complex web of relations that we inherit thereby, that
we might inhabit research questions ethically. Ethics and eros, in this Ar-
istotelian sense rather than a Freudian one. are inescapably intertwined,
and this intertwining, this chiasmus, is crucial. As psychoanalysis teaches
us, such “erotic” knowing is always partial and situated, always inter-
twined. Indeed, it is this partiality, this situatedness, this intertwining,
that structures our (feminist) (research) stories as accountable (Haraway
). Within this paradigm, an ethical mode of accountability needs
eros. Agape, in its unconditionality, its lack of situated attention-­to-­the-­
conditions-­that-­are-­the-­case, fails “to fulfill the messy conditions of being
in love” (Haraway, — a love that is both driven and noninnocent.
    It is only eros that can fulfill these messy conditions.
    In other words, when in love-­as-­eros, the story is never told; it is always
in the process of unfolding, and therefore always in need of new ways of
accounting and rendering accountable. Haraway loves Roland and Cay-
enne. It is that love, and her need to take what she inherits with that love
seriously, that guides her research in Companion Species. True love (eros)
leads, as Haraway models for us, to true curiosity — to truly driven curios-
ity. The kind of curiosity that lends itself well to the “drive” that psycho-
analysis thinks with; the kind of curiosity that can get one into trouble,
and that forces one to try and figure out how, in Haraway’s idiom, to stay
with that trouble.14
    At the heart of this book is the proposition that taking research-­creation
seriously, as a relatively new turn on the art-­academic stage, gives those
of us operating as artist-­researchers/researcher-­artists the opportunity
to re-­envision and re-­craft — to re-­story — our practices and labor, and,
perhaps most importantly, our pedagogy, within university ecologies. As
a full-­time academic in the Canadian university system, it is my experi-
ence that one may be rewarded for being an artist-­scholar, hired in studio


            may be rewarded for being a scholar-­artist, hired in art history, who does
practice-­led work that takes the form of academic writing (although this
happens less often than the former). But to do both, simultaneously or
sequentially, is, at best, to have half of one’s labor demoted when it comes
time for merit-­based adjudication for pay increments or tenure; at worst,
it is to be deemed a “dilettante.”15
    As I phrased it in the introduction, the struggle, here, is not for ac-
knowledgment (a seat at the table: “Look! Now artists can be researchers
too!” or vice versa). It is for the insertion of voices and practices that trou-
ble the relays of knowledge/power that figure the disciplines impacted by
any given research-­creation practice. As part and parcel of questioning the
stranglehold of disciplinary legibility on our practices in the university —
as teachers, as researchers, as colleagues — today, we must attend to the
ways that the disciplined university, with its merit boards and granting
agencies structured to assess faculty outputs on the basis of contribution
not to “new knowledge” in general but to new knowledge within a disci-
pline, often renders those who would work practicetheoretically, attentive
to King’s ethics-­producing stories and Haraway’s curiosity-­bound eros,
both illegible and, in the most hostile of assessments, suspect. Research-­
creation, as an emergent, ethico-­erotic form, allows us to tell new stories in
new ways in the university landscape — stories that demand, in turn, new
research literacies and outputs, modes of assessment and accountability,
and new pedagogical modalities. Rather than allowing discipline to tell
us what questions are worthwhile and what methods are appropriate, a
research-­creational approach insists that it is to our deepest, doggiest,
most curious loves that we are beholden, and that it is love — eros — that
must drive our research questions as well as our methodological toolkits.
    In asserting this, I am in no way arguing against the value of disciplin-
ary seriousness and care. Attention to disciplinary inheritance is crucial.
Disciplinary attention and care, the how of doing things in certain con-
texts toward certain ends, matters, materially and politically. What I am
suggesting, however, is that an ethical structure of research cannot, if we
understand the ethics at stake here to be something expressed in the form
of Haraway’s love for her dog(s) or Charm in her digging, be given first and
foremost by discipline.
    Disciplinary approaches are, more often than not, organized by mor-


als and not ethics precisely to the degree that they think they know the
parameters of the question and the appropriate form for the answer.17
Disciplines discipline us. Eros has no truck with such disciplining. To or-
ganize one’s topic or method according to discipline may be pragmatic,
and in many cases even necessary, and oftentimes incredibly useful,
but not, on the psychoanalytic model I am taught by, ethical. Instead, a
research-­creational approach informed by King and Haraway insists on
a multiplicity of responsive practices structured by situated (emergent,
erotic, driven) accountability. While there are surely times when ethnog-
raphy or discourse analysis or actor-­network theory are the tools needed
to get at what needs to be gotten to, research-­creation, as a “problem-­
oriented” modality, puts situated curiosity — troubling and troublesome,
erotic curiosity — at the helm.
    Further, while research-­creation can be understood as a mode of en-
gagement allied with many interdisciplinary, curiosity-­driven, problem-­
oriented approaches in the academy, given its grounding in artistic prac-
tices and methods, it also insists that artistic process and production be
understood as transmissible knowledge with a ranked equivalence to the
knowledge-­making practices of other disciplines (Candlin ). That is,
most commonly, it asserts a form of making that has traditionally been
understood as expressive rather than analytically communicative (often,
although not always, art making), as equivalent in value (though different
in kind) to the knowledge-­making practices of traditional academic disci-
plines. In this respect, research-­creation is taught by the ways that femi-
nism has dealt with the denigration of certain forms of work (maintenance
and care work) and certain vocalities (the “personal voice”). It is taught this
not only by feminism, but by Indigenous, decolonial, and antiracist schol-
arship challenging institutional structures and intellectual traditions that
draw their power from seeing certain kinds of research as nonresearch.19
    I think here of works like Leanne Betasamosake Simpson’s () Is-
lands of Decolonial Love and Audre Lorde’s ([] ) Sister Outsider.
Each of these texts is made up of interconnected fragments: Simpson’s is
a collection of poignant stories that make palpable the different worlds
made by Native and settler stories in (what is now called) Canada; Lorde’s
is a collection of essays tracking her experience of histories of systemic,
localized oppression on the basis of race, gender, and sexuality in (what
is now called) the United States. Both are calls to consciousness. And


           pointed storytelling; it takes the form of Lorde’s passionate first-­person
address. Both texts leap off the page, inviting us to think carefully about
which stories we are telling, why, and how, in the university today.20
    The how, here, is crucial.
    As I have been claiming it, research-­creation, at its most interesting,
emerges when the modes of interdisciplinarity that have become common
to the early twenty-­fi rst-­century university (the bringing together of dif-
ferent methodological literacies that illuminate new ways of thinking and
doing relevant to a pressing problem but that results in a single species of
output, for example, a book) shift to allow for the bringing together not
only of different methodological literacies but of different species of output
(a book and a video or an essay and a performance) that, while dissonant
in terms of their language, are understood to have equally weighted value
as objects of knowledge production and impact within university commu-
nities and their assessment rubrics. Such work, while crossing “practice-­
theory” lines in the literacies that it mobilizes, does not result in either a
written essay or an exhibition, but insists on the “double-­headedness” of
multiple, equally weighted, output forms, and has impact at the meth-
odological level for practitioners, at the assessment level for institutions,
and at the dissemination level for both. These distinctions are key.
    While, for example, artistic works such as conceptual artist Mary Kel-
ly’s Post-­Partum Document ( – or academic ones such as anthro-
pologist Natasha Myers’s “Anthropologist as Transducer in a Field of Af-
fects” (forthcoming) model an interdisciplinary approach to practice and
theory that has relevance for research-­creation, because of the weighted
values of these outputs they are not generally understood as research-­
creation strictly speaking. Kelly’s Post-­Partum Document is a conceptual
and research-­based art installation that tracks and analyzes Kelly’s first
six years of motherhood through a Lacanian developmental lens. It takes
the form of found object and text panels paired with psychoanalytic text
panels (. pieces in total). It also takes the form of a book that includes
theoretical essays and art-­historical reflection. Myers’s “Anthropolo-
gist as Transducer in a Field of Affects” is an academic essay that mo-
bilizes dance literacies, daily-­practice performance art, and drawing to
develop new tools for ethnographic analysis. Importantly, Myers’s writing
does not explicate the creative practice or process as an equally weighted


mode of rendering public the research, but, rather, describes its use as a
methodological tool for transforming the field of anthropology. Both of
these projects have something to offer to an expanded understanding of
research-­creation in an interdisciplinary context. However, as representa-
tive examples, they help show how relations of “practice” to “theory” can
be made to resolve quite easily into legible disciplinary identities —a work
of research-­based conceptual art (Kelly) and an innovative anthropologi-
cal essay (Myers) without in any way diminishing their brilliance. Here,
“Anthropologist as Transducer in a Field of Affects” and Post-­Partum Doc-
ument emerge as relevant for but not exemplary of research-­creation due
to the fact that, while each work succeeds in interweaving “practice” and
“theory,” one side of the binary is understood as support/developmental
or conceptual material for the other. An “exemplary” research-­creation
practice resists this hierarchy in the context of the academy, rerouting our
disciplinary orientations in such a way as to allow both forms of output to
hold equal professional weight.
    This latter is what Simon Penny () calls deep interdisciplinarity.24
Penny distinguishes deep interdisciplinarity thus: “[What is at stake is]
the formation of practitioners who are neither artists nor engineers, [but]
who are equal parts both” (, 33). In alliance with Penny, the mode
of research-­creation argued for in this book works from the premise that
interdisciplinarity requires being attentive to disciplinarily “othering”
habits that privilege either artistic or technoscientific or social scientific
or humanities-­based habits of thought and dissemination. Further, to be
both equally and responsively weighted between practice and theory means
not only that written components and artistic components are structured
as equally-­weighted-­though-­differentially-­vocalized research outputs, but
that the very forms of each must be made responsive to the research at
stake. If robust interdisciplinarity asks that one start with a research ques-
tion and then bring together the disciplines most useful for addressing
that question, research-­creation pushes this one step further, asking: what
output forms—modes of publication—might most interestingly and gen-
eratively render that research public. As Roland Barthes wrote in,
“in order to do interdisciplinary work, it is not enough to take a ‘subject’
(a theme) and to arrange two or three sciences around it. Interdisciplin-
ary study consists of creating a new object, which belongs to no one” (72).
    Belonging to no one, research-­creational outputs, in this context, might


           Star () call boundary objects. Bowker and Star define boundary objects
as “those objects that both inhabit several communities of practice and
satisfy the informational requirements of each of them. Boundary objects
are thus both plastic enough to adapt to the local needs and constraints of
the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a com-
mon identity across sites. They are weakly structured in common use and
become strongly structured in individual-­site use.... These objects may
be abstract or concrete... but their structure is common enough to more
than one world to make them recognizable, a means of translation” (297).
If disciplines articulate themselves by laying claim to specific research ob-
jects, methods, modes of attention, questions, and lineages of discourse,
what a boundary object does is create something like an uncanny tie across
disciplines, retaining a certain amount of internal coherence while denat-
uralizing methodologies and analyses endemic to different disciplinary
locations. A boundary object does things with disciplines, satisfying certain
of their requirements, without, however, belonging properly to any one
of them.