
I C O U L D N E V E R H A V E written this book without having had the immense
privilege of a tenure-­track and now tenured position in the Department
of Art and Design at the University of Alberta. The department has a long
and important history. It was, for example, the first program in Canada to
offer a Master of Visual Arts (established in ), when the bfa was still
the reigning terminal degree. Here in Art and Design, I find myself in an
open-­minded, creative, forward-­thinking place, filled with generous col-
leagues who have supported me in developing my research-­creational vi-
sion on the ground, testing and playing with research-­creationalizing my
courses in the History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture, and, through
this, learning what works, what doesn’t, and what is possible given the
larger constraints of the twenty-­fi rst-­century university.
   I would like to start, then, by acknowledging my colleagues in Art and
Design who, through conversation and debate, have contributed to the
thinking in these pages and to my well-­being in the department, some in
large ways and some perhaps without even realizing it: Tim Antoniuk,
Allen Ball, Kathleen Berto, Betsy Boone, Sean Caulfield, Lisa Claypool,
Sue Colberg, Walter Davis, Cezary Gajewski, Joan Greer, Tanya Harnett,
Steven Harris, Gillian Harvey, Liz Ingram, Rob Lederer, Dawn McLean,
Lianne McTavish, Marilène Oliver, Gavin Renwick, Aidan Rowe, Stan
Szynkowski, Jesse Thomas, and Caitlin Wells. Thank you to each and
every one of you for contributing to the vibrancy of the department I call
home.
   This book was also made possible by fierce, feminist, decolonial col-
leagues in other departments at the University of Alberta, colleagues who
make my pedagogical present livable. I am more than lucky to work in
such an environment, where the number of good colleagues that surround
me, attuned to social and ecological justice in the classrooms and in the
hallways, exceeds what I can list here. I learn from them daily and am
privileged to work among them.
   On the research-­creational front, I would like to acknowledge those
involved in the Kule Institute for Advanced Study – funded Research-­
Creation Working Group, and its subsequent incarnation, the Research-­
Creation and Social Justice CoLABoratory, for being central to the devel-
opment of my thinking in these pages. Affectionately called “the CoLAB,”
the research cluster is comprised of studio leads and allies at the Univer-
sity of Alberta committed to the critical discourse of research-­creation.
Thanks are due to: Sean Caulfield, Diane Conrad, Piet Defraeye, Joan
Greer, Sourayan Mookerjea, Fiona Nicoll, Danielle Peers, Gavin Ren-
wick, Scott Smallwood, Lin Snelling, Kim TallBear, Sheena Wilson, and
last but not least, our tireless and indispensable doctoral research fellow
Jessie Beier.
   It is out of the very first set of CoLAB events that this book was born.
In addition to the above, sincere thanks are due to participants in the Feb-
ruary  Researching Research-­Creation symposium — Fiona Candlin,
Malcolm Macdonald, Erin Manning, George Smith — and to those in the
March  Knowings and Knots: Methodologies and Ecologies in Research-­
Creation think tank. My heartfelt gratitude goes out to presenters: Owen
Chapman, Paul Couillard, Randy Lee Cutler, Tagny Duff, Caitlin Fisher,
Glen Lowry, and Natasha Myers; respondents Carolina Cambre, Risa
Horowitz, Petra Hroch, Sourayan Mookerjea, and Kim Sawchuk; dis-
cussants Catherine Adams, Piet Defraeye, Geoffrey Rockwell, and Scott
Smallwood; and to distinguished keynote participant Donna Haraway,
as well as to student volunteers and assistants Catherine Clune-­Taylor,
Lindsay Eales, Lindsay Ruth Hunt, Naureen Mumtaz, Ika Peraić, Layal
Shuman, Emilie St. Hilaire, Michael J. H. Woolley.
   After the initial inspiration emerging from these events, the real work


x Acknowledgments
of writing and rewriting began. The following friends and colleagues each,
at one or many key moments in the process, read some or all of these pages,
offering indispensable insights and suggestions: Owen Chapman, Paul
Couillard, Dia Da Costa, Caitlin Fisher, Laura Gonzalez, Cressida Heyes,
Jan Jagodzinski, Lucian O’Connor, Alissa Overend, Carrie Smith, George
Smith, Chloë Taylor, Terri Tomsky, Rob Trumbull, and Sheena Wilson.
In addition to those who generously gave their eyes and minds and hearts
to reading parts or all of the manuscript, there were others who talked
through some of its key ideas with me, individually or in the context of
public presentations. Special thanks to Alex Da Costa, Beatriz da Costa,
Allison de Fren, Tagny Duff, Andrew Gow, Nat Hurley, Lindsay Kelley,
Eben Kirksey, Deirdre Logue, Stephanie Loveless, Krista Lynes, Patrick
Mahon, Erin Manning, Keavy Martin, Jill Miller, Allyson Mitchell, Na-
tasha Myers, Lissette Olivares, Danielle Peers, Christine Pountney, Maria
Puig de la Bellacasa, Geoffrey Rockwell, Chris Salter, Alexis Shotwell,
Scott Smallwood, and Heather Zwicker for conversations and critical
prompts at various points along the way.
    Of course, after the writing is “done” there is the next stage of labor.
Central to getting this book from manuscript to final form were Susan Al-
bury, Emma Jacobs, Jordan Kinder, Joanne Muzak, and Olivia Polk, who
edited, found images, midwifed, and otherwise held my hand through the
nitty gritty of the book preparation. I am also deeply grateful to the anony-
mous reviewers of my manuscript. They generously saw its heart and aim,
while pointing out weaknesses in ways that helped to make it better. This
is the kind of labor that makes the university a rich and rewarding place
and that needs to be acknowledged much more than it is. From the bot-
tom of my heart: thank you.
    Because this is a book about pedagogy as much as it is about art, I
would like to take the time to name the debt that is due to all those teach-
ers who were central to my training and who modeled, inspired, or oth-
erwise prompted the pedagogical perspectives that gave rise to the book.
At the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: Marilyn Arsem, S. A.
Bachman, Fritz Buehner, and Jane Hudson; at Tufts University: Madeline
Caviness, Lee Edelman, Maura Reilly, and Eric Rosenberg; at the Uni-
versity of California, Santa Cruz: James Clifford, Angela Davis, Teresa de
Lauretis, Donna Haraway, Catherine Soussloff, Anna Tsing, and Hayden
White; at Utrecht University: Rosi Braidotti; and lastly, three teachers


       Acknowledgments        xi
from my childhood: Beverly (Bunny) Blonde (Royal West Academy),
Sally Berdebes (Fine Arts Core Education), and my earliest (nonfamil-
ial) teacher, who gave me a pedagogical home when I was lost and taught
me the love of opaque language, Christine Kierans (the Children’s Shake-
speare Company).
    In addition to acknowledging my teachers, I would like to acknowl-
edge my students. The students in my seminars on research-­creation (and
my research-­creationally informed seminars!) have been indispensable
to my thinking on this topic. Without students who teach me, challenge
me, and inspire me, this book would never have been written. Indeed, the
work of several of these students is discussed explicitly in these pages; the
work of others implicitly informs my writing, and I plan for the work of
still others to inform my writing-­to-­come. While I can’t name all of them,
I will name those in the special independent study that came out of my
Art and/in the Anthropocene seminar at a crucial moment in the writing
process: Jessa Gillespie, Leila Plouffe, Max Turner, and Daniel Walker.
Thank you for thinking with me, inspiring me, and doing such wonder-
ful work.
    Finally, on a personal front, an extra special thanks go out to a few
folks: Brian Axel, who first introduced me to the university-­as-­site; Ev-
elyne Lord for teaching me what it means to live an aesthetic life; Rob-
ert Loveless for nurturing my early intellectual curiosity and rebellion;
Stephanie Loveless and Christine Pountney for being kin in all the ways
that matter; Marilyn Arsem, who supported me in the earliest moments of
my practicetheoretical development, with openness and vision; Lee Edel-
man, who introduced me to, and nurtured my love of, psychoanalytic the-
ory and pushed me to grow in unexpected directions; Donna Haraway,
to whom I owe more, pedagogically, theoretically, and personally, than I
could ever begin to name but that I attempt, daily, to “pay forward”; Ken
Wissoker, whose brilliant editorial vision produced many of the books
that I first fell in love with, and who remained steadfastly committed to
this project even when I had my doubts; Sheena Wilson, for modeling
powerful feminist collaborative ethics in the academy and making me be-
lieve in it again; Alissa Overend for being there with and for me from the
minute I arrived in Edmonton and Lucian O’Connor, one of my HistCon
kin and favorite humans, both of whom unwaveringly read draft upon
draft, talking me through many a struggle and standing with me every



xii Acknowledgments
step of the way; and, most importantly, Sha LaBare, my primary partner
in life, in parenting, and in dreaming up futures that are better enough.

Earlier versions of some of the arguments found in this book are published
in Natalie S. Loveless, “Reading with Knots: On Jane Gallop’s Anecdotal
Theory,” S: The Journal of the Jan van Eyck Circle for Lacanian Ideology Cri-
tique 4 ():. – “Practice in the Flesh of Theory: Art, Research and
the Fine Arts PhD,” Canadian Journal of Communications no. 1 ():
. d’art canadienne/Canadian Art Review no. 1 (): 54.

This manuscript was supported with funds from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Kule Institute for Ad-
vanced Study, the Killam Research Fund, and the Canadian First Excel-
lent Research Fund (cferf) on Future Energy Systems via Just Powers,
an interdisciplinary research project on feminist and decolonial energy
transition and futures.




      Acknowledgments        xiii
We need researchers able to participate in the creation of the responses on which
the possibility of a future that is not barbaric depends.
— Isabelle Stengers, In Catastrophic Times, 73


The recognition that one cannot know the other or the self, but must ask in re-
spect for all of time who and what are emerging in a relationship, is the key.
— Donna Har away, The Companion Species Manifesto, 50


To be a teacher is my greatest work of art.
— Joseph Beuys, Energy Plan for the Western Man: Joseph Beuys in America, 8




     Art in the Expanded Field



I N 1 9 7 9 A R T H I S T O R I A N Rosalind Krauss published a now well-­k nown es-
say called “Sculpture in the Expanded Field.” In it, Krauss argues that she
can no longer analyze emerging artistic forms using the tools in the con-
temporary art toolkit at her disposal. New hybrid forms demand new, ex-
panded categories if they are to be accountably dealt with. Sculpture has
been remade, she tells us, not only by categories such as the Duchampian
Readymade and the neo-­Dadaist Combine, but by the emerging catego-
ries of installation and earth or land art — artistic gestures that are trans-
forming sculpture from the production of distinct three-­dimensional
objects on pedestals to something less clearly definable, something that
hovers ambivalently between architecture and not-­architecture, land-
scape and not-­landscape, and that properly belongs to neither (Krauss
, 37).1
    What is most interesting to me about the categories Krauss proposes
is the way that they oscillate between the strict corners of her definitional
world, pulling in different directions, tumbling out of the very structures
that she develops to contain them. Because of this, the essay is one that I
still teach today, yearly, in an undergraduate lecture course called Themes
in Contemporary Art. I teach it because it does a wonderful job helping
students grapple with the genre-­bending and social-­and-­spatial-­remaking
capacities of mid-­twentieth-­century artistic practice, helping us move
from an understanding of art as easel painting or bronze cast sculpture to
being able to read, analyze, and situate expanded contemporary practices
such as new genre public art, relational aesthetics, art-­as-­social-­practice,
and works that fall under what has been called the educational or peda-
gogical turn (Bishop ; O’Neill and Wilson ; Podesva ; Rog-
off ).2
    While not its explicit focus, the pedagogical turn in contemporary
art is one with which this book is in conversation. In the pages that fol-
low, I attend specifically to the ways that dialogic, socially oriented, and
research-­based art practices are remade within the university-­as-­site. I be-
gin by situating research-­creation — a sister term to what is often called
artistic research — within a local context, that of the Canadian univer-
sity in which I currently teach. This situated focus grounds my analysis,
but my words and thoughts are not simply offered here to the Canadian
academy. They emerge from my experience as an AmeriCanadian (dual)
citizen, trained primarily in England and the United States, now teach-
ing in Canada. With this book, I aim to contribute not only to readers in
Canada, and not only to the visual arts, but to those in other, related, sites
of debate on artistic research in university contexts.
    Drawing on texts that are common currency within these debates (for
example, Christopher Frayling’s  “Research in Art and Design”), as
well as texts that are not (such as Jacques Lacan’s  lectures on the gaze
as objet petit a), this book-­length manifesto offers itself as both love song
and lament. I interrogate research-­creation as a genre full of exciting peda-
gogical and institutional possibility. I also lament the hopeless exhaustion
I see in colleagues all around me, as our system follows quickly on the
heels of the UK and Australia, with an increased corporatization of the
university and a complex and insidious evisceration of experimental peda-
gogy and research (Davidson ; Jeppesen and Nazar ; Royle ).

The manifesto is a genre that I invoke in the title as well as the form of
this book. It matters deeply to my project and is inspired by Donna Har-
away’s two, well-­k nown, manifestos ( and ). A manifesto is a call
to action. It mobilizes declarative and persuasive language and works to
manifest a different world, performatively. In the case of this book, I offer
a hybrid formation: something between the rigor of a scholarly mono-


2 Introduction
graph and the heartfelt framing of a manifesto. I do this toward a vision of
a university not in ruins (Readings ), not abandoned to professional
justification and defensive metrics, but of a feminist university of creativ-
ity, experiment, and what I will frame in the pages to come as a mode of
eros that is committed, cathected, and sustaining.
    As a strategy of resistance to the resignation that surrounds me daily in
the arts and humanities wings of the university, I look to research-­creation,
even as it is being commodified right under our feet, as a site of generative
recrafting: a touchstone and orienting point that might help render daily
life in the academy more pedagogically, politically, and affectively sustain-
able. That said, the research-­creational struggle that animates this book
is not for acknowledgment (a seat at the table: “Look! Now artists can be
researchers too!”). It is for the insertion of voices and practices into the
academic everyday that work to trouble disciplinary relays of knowledge/
power, allowing for more creative, sensually attuned modes of inhabiting
the university as a vibrant location of pedagogical mattering.
    As I have written elsewhere (Loveless ), I first began grappling
with research-­creation (although not under that name) in, when, as
an art student (mfa) at a US museum school, I found myself craving a
level of academic training that the museum school was not, at the time, set
up to support. I had many excellent teachers there. They read philosophy
and literary theory, made art, and provided a critically informed studio
environment that was top notch. But different training practices (peda-
gogical, institutional, academic) carry with them different needs, orienta-
tions, and expertise. Being at a museum school designed to support excel-
lent studio (and poststudio) practice aimed at a professional art market
and extended art world, I was not going to get the kind of attention to my
scholarly thinking and writing that I would under different institutional
and disciplinary conditions. So, to get what I needed, I added, in, a
second degree (an ma in contemporary art history and theory) at a nearby
university, and completed both in.
    The craving that led to this desire was twofold. It was a craving of the
heartmind: I simply fell in love with the kind of thinking, reading, and
writing practices associated with the work of contemporary art theory
and criticism. It was also a craving that emerged endogenously from the
work I was doing in my studio: the more I gravitated toward conceptual
and feminist art practice, the more theory and history I needed. I couldn’t


“get” Mary Kelly’s germinal Post-­Partum Document without also seriously
grappling with Lacan and Freud. And I couldn’t grapple with Freud and
Lacan without serious study and pedagogical mentorship. Of course, such
theory and history could have been studied, enjoyed, and directed toward
an informed artistic practice, as has been done by many a research-­based
artist. But, it turns out, in terms of my outputs — in terms of the things I
wanted to make in the world — academic or scholarly essays, articles, and
books also appealed to me. More than appealed. I found myself desiring
both, and driven to do both, simultaneously and in equal measure. And
I had the privilege of being located at two institutions (the School of the
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, and Tufts University, Medford — then not
combined as they are now), each of which provided me with the space and
conditions of possibility to flourish in concurrent, overlapping, noniden-
tical worlds (degree programs). This, as I will return to in the pages that
follow, turned out to be key.
   My story is not unique. While it was not the norm at the time, and ar-
guably is still not the norm today, I have since met many a kindred spirit
with a similar story. For instance, in my hometown of Montréal, at the
very moment that I was navigating these drives and forging what looked
(to me) like new paths, a range of university-based practitioners and schol-
ars were already developing studio-laboratories (Century ) dedicated
to exploring, championing, and supporting such practices under the term
research-creation, the Université de Québec à Montréal (UQAM) had al-
ready started the first fine arts PhD in Canada (in French), and in the UK
doctoral degrees in the fine arts were already being awarded.

Research-­creation is a geographically specific term that works in tandem
with alternatives such as practice-­based research, practice-­led research,
research-­based practice, research-­led practice, creative-­praxis, arts-­driven
inquiry, arts-­based research, and, increasingly, artistic research. This
ever-­growing roster speaks to the ways that artistic practices come to be
understood as research methods and outputs in university contexts and
the different ways that artistic practices with research bases or bents have
been codified since (at least) the s when, in the UK, doctoral degrees
in fine or visual arts practice began to be awarded (Barrett and Bolt ;
Biggs and Karlsson ; Haseman ; Leavy ). Distinctions be-
tween these terms and the practices they stand for are debated regularly,


. and these debates are linked not only to new doctoral programs but also
to national funding structures and, increasingly, national research chairs.5
    The website for Creativity and Cognition Studios, started by Linda
Candy and Ernest Edmonds in  at Loughborough University (UK) to
explore intersections of art-­and technology-­based research (now housed
at the University of Technology, Sydney), distinguishes practice-­based
from practice-­led research thus: “Practice-­based research is an original in-
vestigation undertaken in order to gain new knowledge partly by means of
practice and the outcomes of that practice. In a doctoral thesis, claims of
originality and contribution to knowledge may be demonstrated through
creative outcomes in the form of designs, music, digital media, perfor-
mances and exhibitions. Whilst the significance and context of the claims
are described in words, a full understanding can only be obtained with di-
rect reference to the outcomes.” Practice-­led research, on the other hand,
“is concerned with the nature of practice and leads to new knowledge that
has operational significance for that practice. In a doctoral thesis, the re-
sults of practice-­led research may be fully described in text form with-
out the inclusion of a creative work. The primary focus of the research is
to advance knowledge about practice, or to advance knowledge within
practice. Such research includes practice as an integral part of its method
and often falls within the general area of action research” (Creativity and
Cognition Studios n.d.). If we parse these passages to clarify one of the
distinctions this book will examine, we see that practice-­based research
generates new knowledge through or by means of artistic practice it-
self, and practice-­led research draws on artistic methods to generate new
knowledge for or about artistic practice in written form. In other words,
it is the mode of output (all text, versus part text + part creative outcome),
and the weighted role of artistic practice within this, that remains central
to the definitions at stake. As I will go on to argue throughout these pages,
these are definitional debates that matter not to the making of research-­
based art in general, but rather to the use of artistic forms and methods as
the rendering public (publishing) of research within a university context.6
    Initially seen as a way to support artistic research practices in univer-
sity contexts, research-creation took hold in Québec after several pilot
programs—starting at uqam in  and slowly integrated into Qué-
bec’s provincial research councils in the mid to late s—and was
then expanded nationally by the Social Sciences and Humanities Re-


search Council of Canada (sshrc), the primary humanities and social
sciences funding body in Canada. The definition of research-­creation
given by sshrc is telling. Since June, the sshrc website has defined
research-­creation as “an approach to research that combines creative and
academic research practices, and supports the development of knowledge
and innovation through artistic expression, scholarly investigation, and
experimentation” (sshrc ). Distinguishing itself from sshrc’s defi-
nition, the Canada Council for the Arts, the national granting board that
supports artistic development and production in Canada, initially framed
research-­creation as research/creation, stating that their grants provided
“artists with opportunities for creative renewal, experimentation, profes-
sional development and research” (cca n.d.). Of interest here, beyond
the particularities of nationally specific granting structures, is the subtle
way that a research approach or act (what is being produced and how)
is foregrounded in sshrc’s definition, while artistic disciplinary iden-
tity (who is doing what) is at the core of the Canada Council’s. While
Canada Council’s “slash” prioritized the professional identity of the artist,
sshrc’s hyphen indicates a hybrid formation, part research, part creation,
part experiment that focuses on the output of the research.
    At the heart of terminological distinctions such as those proposed by
the Creativity and Cognition Studios, the Canada Council for the Arts,
and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, is
the question of the status of art as itself a form of research. While sensi-
tive to the disciplinary stakes of this question, unlike many books in this
genre, mine is not an argument for the validity of artistic practice as a
de facto legitimate form of research. The project of raising the category
“artist” to the status of “academic researcher” in the university hierarchy,
while pragmatically important, is of less interest to me than the consid-
eration of what research-­creational approaches offer to the project of re-
thinking interdisciplinary practice and politics in the North American
university today. In this context, it seems to me that, in very many ways,
giving “art” the status of “research” does little more than echo early femi-
nist interventions into the canon that took the form of “add women and
stir” — a tokenistic gesture of inclusion that does nothing to change the
logics that structure these exclusions in the first place.10
    In the context of the university, while research-­creation is (most often)
linked to artistic production, its real potential rests in its demand for an in-


6 Introduction
ter-­or transdisciplinary perspective that, while marshalling the insights of
emerging and developing fine arts research methodologies, exceeds the
fine arts proper. Research-­creation, read in this way, demands a reconfig-
uration of standard academic pedagogical training and assessment prac-
tices — what we permit our professors and students to do and how — as
well as our divisional and departmental making practices. Here, and in
what follows, my focus is not on research-­based art practices in general
but on what research-­creation does in, to, and as part of ongoing univer-
sity discourse in the arts, humanities, and social sciences, with specific at-
tention to what research-­creation does to our understanding of scholarly
form at the graduate and doctoral levels.
    Fine or Visual Art PhD (and Doctor of Fine or Visual Art) programs
have existed internationally since the early s, and have recently
gained traction in the United States and Canada. There is some debate
over where and when the very first doctoral degree in visual arts practice
(i.e., some version or other of research-­creation in art, in English-­speaking
contexts) was offered. Fiona Candlin was among the first in the UK to
earn a research-­creation – like doctorate with her dissertation, “Artwork
and the Boundaries of Academia: A Theoretical/Practical Negotiation
of Contemporary Art Practice within the Conventions of Academic Re-
search” (Keele University, ), and Gavin Renwick was the first to do
so in Scotland with his project, “Spatial Determination in the Canadian
North: A Theoretical Overview and Practice-­Based Response” (Univer-
sity of Dundee, ). A decade and a half later, in, Kevin Rogers
(“Out of Order: Thinking through Robin Collyer, Discontent and Affir-
mation ( – ),” University of Western Ontario) and Risa Horo­w itz
(“Disciplining Art Practice: Work, Hobby, and Expertise in Practice-­
Based Scholarship (Blurry Canada, Potager, Scrabble),” York University)
were awarded (to the best of my knowledge) the first English-­language
research-­creation degrees in the visual arts in Canada — both, in fact, on
the same day (August 23). These latter were fine arts doctoral degrees
based in both a written ­document and artistic output.12
    The awarding of degrees such as these has caused much debate, mostly
focusing on the relation between art and the academy. Sometimes con-
cerns come from those in the humanities and social sciences who have
trouble imagining how a “chapter” can take the form of a performance or
installation. At other times the concern comes from those who have been


trained as artists, worried that their disciplinary modes of knowing and
producing are being forced to become more “academic” even when they
don’t want (or need) to be. Such anxieties (of place, category, and orien-
tation) are compounded by the fact that at the same time as many uni-
versities in the United States and Canada have been working to develop
research-­creational PhD programs, art academies — for example, Cana-
da’s oldest conservatories such as the Emily Carr School of Art and De-
sign, the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, and the Ontario College
of Art and Design — have reconfigured themselves from “art school” to
“university” (i.e., becoming the Emily Carr University of Art and Design,
nascad University, and ocad University). Given the legitimization of
art-­as-­research in universities (under the banner of research-­creation) and
in the art-­school-­reframed-­as-­university, artists often find themselves,
whether they want to or not, having to learn how to navigate the legiti-
mating (and often confining) structures of social science- and humani-
ties-based university granting boards, and the modes of output and as-
sessment specific to those areas of the university. In this context, many
ask whether these shifts, for both art conservatories and research univer-
sities, are simply a matter of bums in seats and the financial bottom line:
Are art schools just trying to survive by widening their market and access
to public funds through accreditation? Or, from the university side, are
universities simply using art as an attempt to render research outcomes
“relatable”? Is art being used as a lackey in the university’s push to prove
“real-­world” impact (what my home university frames as “for the public
good”)? Is this really why research-­creation is being supported — when it
is — in academic contexts?
    My hope — a hope that emerges from almost a decade of thinking
about and teaching in research-­creational contexts — is that while, cer-
tainly, each of these anxieties has merit, it is not only these things that
are at work. Despite the seemingly all-­pervasive instrumentalizing and
optimizing push governing university climates at this historical moment,
one that renders many of my colleagues suspicious of research-­creation
and the uses to which it is being put, I continue to see research-­creation
as one of those cracks (to paraphrase Leonard Cohen) that lets the light
shine in, through its experimental and dissonant forms of practice, re-
search, and pedagogy. It is for this reason that, instructed and inspired by
colleagues both national and international, I mobilize research-­creation

