reason that the central provocation of The Truth about Stories is that sto-
ries are “wondrous things. And they are dangerous” (King, 9; em-
phasis added). Stories are wondrous in their capacity to reorganize our
approaches to our social-­material worlds; they are dangerous for their ca-
pacity to produce themselves as compelling objects of belief,3 naturalized,
as all too many of us see year in and year out in the classroom, into calci-
fied truths. Which is why King uses repetition — iteration, stories remak-
ing stories, telling and retelling — to remind us that the telling of stories
is a political performative. A world-­making, knowledge-­making practice.
    One of the ways King does this is by opening and closing each of the
five chapters of his lecture-­text with the following repetitive structure:
each chapter opens with someone, somewhere, in a dialogic setting, tell-
ing a version of a creation story in which the earth floats on the back of a
turtle that is on the back of another turtle that is on the back of another
turtle: “turtles all the way down” (2, 122). This introductory
story is followed in each case, word for word, by the following sentence,
invoking the title of the book: “The truth about stories is that that’s all we
are.” Each chapter then ends by reflecting back on the story told: “Take
[X’s] story, for instance. It’s yours. Do with it what you will.... But don’t
say in the years to come that you would have lived life differently if only
you had heard this story. You’ve heard it now” (1151).
    Don’t say in the years to come that you would have lived life differently
if only you had heard this story.
    You’ve heard it now.
    Through this repetitive narrative structure, King invites us to think
about stories as material-­semiotic events that impact—indeed, config-
ure — worlds. He invites us to attend carefully to which stories stick;
which stories, by performing themselves as compelling objects of belief—
being convincingly retold — have the sticky staying power to change how
one sees the world, and thus how one acts within it. Through repetition
and direct address, King invites us to be attentive to which stories we are
crafted out of as well as which we participate in crafting; which stories we
teach, and which stories we are taught by.
    Donna Haraway’s The Companion Species Manifesto makes a similar
call for the power of stories. Haraway, a feminist theorist and science
studies scholar, begins her book, published the same year as King’s, with
the following: “I tell stories about stories, all the way down” (, 21).


             densely poetic and, for those not already familiar with her world of refer-
ence, sometimes frustratingly allusive text. Read with each other in mind,
these two books of Haraway’s can be seen to respond to similar questions,
and although these questions are worded differently in each, the way that
they are articulated in Haraway’s later text — specifically, “Whom and
what do I touch when I touch my dog?” and “How is ‘becoming with’ a
practice of becoming worldly?” (, 3) — is key to both.
    Whereas King focuses on the ear, on our capacity to be altered through
ethical listening and speaking practices—forms of listening and speak-
ing that render us response-­able and, through this response-­ablility, able
to be moved to act—Haraway asks us to attend to the material-­semiotic
stories we inherit when ethically touching—being in touch with—the
world around us. For Haraway, we are always already “becoming-­w ith”
and imbricated by all that we touch and that touches us; what and how
we touch and are touched by participates in constituting the stories, the
worlds, within which we live. For King, the relation of storyteller to story-­
listener conditions which stories are whose to tell and when, producing
stories not only as sites of knowledge but as ethical relations. One invites
us to attend to how we are remade by all we speak and hear. One invites us
to attend to how we are remade through all we touch and are touched by.
Both frame these intertwined sensorial relations as productive of stories
that matter.
    Stories of the magnitude at stake here are never innocent. They always
do certain things and not others; rely on certain things and not others.
What King and Haraway ask, each in their own way, by mobilizing differ-
ent stories in different ways, is that we seriously attend to and recognize
the constitutive power of the stories through which we come to under-
stand the world, and, when necessary, give our all to reorganize them.
Importantly, within both King and Haraway’s texts, it is curiosity that
emerges as key to our capacity to make such changes.
  

 departmental precedent. It did so by being the first thesis in the History of
Art, Design, and Visual Culture at the University of Alberta to refuse the
mandate to “write” the research only on the page while also refusing to let
go of its status as art history and theory, claiming the artistic innovations
as part and parcel of the art historical and theoretical work.7
    For those of us situated in departments of art and art history (in North
America, at least), research-­creational ma and PhD programs challenge
not only the methods and aims of traditional art and art history educa-
tion, but also the status of the art object and its circulation. Research-­
creation, in important ways, resists the illustrative frameworks in which
a thesis or dissertation explains, justifies, or describes an artistic prac-
tice (and vice-­versa), exploding the inherited binary between the artist-­
object and the theorist-­subject, and offering something that, while using
the tools, literacies, and skills of both artistic practice and art history,
does something different to, with, and from these “homes.” It challenges
a historically prevalent, sticky and tricky, ideological insistence that ar-
tistic output, the “art object,” cannot effectively communicate scholarly
research. It can emerge from research and invoke ideas, but always, only,
in a fragmentary and fugitive mode. Art, it is said, is evocative, generative,
even confrontational, but too open-ended to constitute research dissemi-
nation per se; art does not make conclusive, defensible arguments and
therefore cannot be, strictly speaking, research; art, as object (or process,
when process replaces object as artistic form), fails if it communicates too
didactically, too clearly, and thus cannot function as scholarly research,
representative of new, transmissible, disseminable, and archivable knowl-
edge. These givens structure the institutional histories that govern the
idea of contemporary art in the academy, in spite of how dated these ideas
might seem to many in the field: art as cultural exemplar, elevator of the
human spirit, mirror of the soul or to the world.
    Sadly, in refusing the artistic gesture as an academic one — refusing
it as knowledge and allowing it only expressive/affective/interventional
cultural value grounded in the excessive, the open-ended, and the inter-
pretive—all too often (although not always) the academic gesture, in con-
tradistinction, becomes anchored to a logic of implementation, account-
ability, and predictable modes of disseminability. This perspective does
a disservice not only to those disciplinarily located in the fine arts, but to


those across the university working with artistic forms and sensibilities
in their research, teaching, and publication practices. In such a context,
the extension of interdisciplinarity’s historical limits within the university
to include “extratextual” forms only compounds and expands anxieties
surrounding interdisciplinary practices in general, and does so in increas-
ingly hostile conditions for such work.
    To work interdisciplinarily has always carried with it certain risks,
such as the revelation of incompetence possible when the skills of one
discipline prove insufficient in another context. While research-­creation
carries these same risks, it raises the stakes significantly. To bring schol-
arly disciplines together with historically nonacademic practices — such
as art-­activist production (in the case of my research), Indigenous sex-
positive storytelling (in the case of my colleagues Kim TallBear and Tracy
Bear),9 critical disability interventions (in the case of my colleague Dani-
elle Peers). or speculative multispecies care-­spaces rendered through
dialogic workshops and intermedia installations (in the case of one of
my current ma students, Daniel Walker) — and then to engage these as
scholarly activities is not only to challenge the questions and methods (and
therefore blind spots) that structure a given discipline (the sine qua non
for interdisciplinarity), it is also to question our very understanding of
the work of the university. It is to push at the various ways that the uni-
versity (specifically in the humanities and social sciences) has established
for making scholarly research public — which modes of publication (what
Lacan, in Seminar XX, famously called poubellication. are seen as valid,
useful, peer reviewable, and capable of pushing an academic discourse
forward in ways legitimated by the fields at stake, and legible (enough)
to those doing the work of assessment to count. It is to allow oneself to
take on the risk of insufficiency without letting oneself off the hook for
accountability.
   It is to tell new stories, in new ways, in the academy.
   And to be told by them.

In his  book The Uncanny, literary theorist Nicholas Royle suggests
taking seriously the affective economy of the uncanny as a mode of po-
litical resistance within the university. Royle’s book was written at a mo-
ment in the UK when what was then called the Research Assessment
Exercise — now called the Research Excellence Framework, a standard-


ized metrics framework to which university funding is tied — was newly
reconfiguring the academic landscape. In the face of the increasingly
strict need to instrumentalize all university labor within the logics of as-
sessment metrics (that is, logics of equivalence and reportable impact),
Royle suggests the uncanny, the unheimlich, as an interdisciplinary politi-
cal mode resistant to any neoliberalizing drive that would appropriate it.12
    Heimlich, referring to the familiar, homey, native, tame, intimate—to be-
ing safe within the walls of one’s own house (oikos), to being “oneself” —
suggests the domestic and domesticated, and, in the context of this chapter,
the disciplinary. The unheimlich, on the other hand, asserts (for Royle, as
for Freud) the ego’s inability to inhabit a position of mastery within its
“own home” (vis-­à-­v is the unconscious). That is, the unheimlich suggests
not simply the unfamiliar but the threateningly unfamiliar; it describes
that profoundly disturbing experience of feeling estranged where one
is supposed to feel at home and of not knowing when one feels that one
should know. It is that thing that erupts unpredictably into an otherwise
unremarkable moment, defamiliarizing it and rendering the presumed
unclear.13
    As many readers in the arts and humanities well know, given the broad
impact of the concept outside of strictly psychoanalytic circles, the un-
canny, as figured in Freud’s original () rereading of E. T. A. Hoff-
mann’s “The Sandman,” invokes not only the ambivalent experience of
something simultaneously placing and displacing, but the conjunction
of these positions — alien, native — in the formation of (psychoanalytic)
identity. In psychoanalytic terms, to experience the uncanny is to always
be, like a boundary object, within and without simultaneously. One is al-
ways conscious and unconscious, knowledgeable and ignorant. Situated
between the animate and inanimate, the living and dead, the “self” and
“other,” the relevant insight of the uncanny is that relations between these
poles are neither stable nor predictable. And it is this latter that renders
the uncanny, for Royle, a site of resistance. In the Freudian uncanny, the
security of a single-­point perspective — intellectual certainty: I see from
here and I see that — is shattered and transported into a register in which
perspectival certainty is impossible.
    Research-­creation, in the ways that it so regularly fail. to resolve
clearly into either “art” or “scholarship,” and in the ways that it so regu-
larly renders its makers illegible from one perspective or another, often


4. unpredictably, is, at its most interesting, a decidedly uncanny practice.
And it is one that is linked to the libidinal drive, introduced in chapter 1,
that I’ve been calling curiosity. This is the drive, linked to the unknown
and the unknowable, that Felman and Weber mobilize above.
    As Weber frames it, “the uncanny is not merely identical with... un-
decidability,” for it includes an ambivalent defense against this undecid-
ability in the form of a curiosity that is irrepressible (, 234). In other
words, the radical undecidability that constitutes the uncanny includes
within it a drive toward knowledge; the uncanny instantiates a (curious)
drive that hovers at the intersection of knowing and not knowing, belong-
ing and not. You can’t be curious about something you already know, but
you need to know something about it in order to be curious.
    Etymologically, curious has the same root as careful or curate: to care.
It brings warning (caution), desire (to know), and considered choice (the
care at stake in curation) together as the name of the (pedagogical) game.
Such a perspective challenges pedagogical ideologies that imagine the
teacher in the light of knowledge and the student in the shadows of igno-
rance, and, instead, tells stories that are much riskier for all involved, but
more accurate (to my experience of the world, at least), and more inter-
esting. When Charm was digging deeper and deeper, she did not know
in advance what she was going to find on the other side, but she did know
enough to think that there might be something there that was interesting
enough to pursue (King, 11). She had a direction in which her curios-
ity was driving her. And it drove her, like Felman against the advice of the
kindly shopkeeper, to keep going in the face of warnings not to dig. Rather
than moving from ignorance to knowledge (“the assumption — usually
unquestioned — that [the point of] reading is finding meaning”; Felman
, 45), the uncanny asserts that feeling displaced (ignorant) at the mo-
ment one feels one should be at home (knowledgeable) is the condition of
knowledge making at its best, the condition that drives curiosity (as a drive
to aim rather than to attain), and a condition that cannot be predicted.
Here, the “curious” brings together the quality of being eager with the
assessment of something as “strange and unusual” (“Curiouser and cu-
riouser!” cries Alice in Adventures in Wonderland). We cannot know in
advance what will ignite our curiosity. Curiosity erupts. Similarly, we can-
not know from where something will be rendered uncanny.
    Interesting in this context is the degree to which (as Freud’s text makes


Discipline(s)clear) it is not in the content of Hoffman’s story that the uncanny emerges,
but its form. More than the story itself, how it is told is what renders it un-
canny. The French philosopher Sarah Kofman reflects on this when she
writes that it “is really the form of the narrative and not the theme in itself
which plays the decisive role in the production of [uncanny] effects” (Kof-
man, 1emphasis added). This emphasis on form is borne out in
Hoffmann’s “The Sandman” in the way that the text unsettles, formally,
the first and third person: the epistolary voice and that of the omniscient
narrator. Weber highlights this as well: the uncanny, “already busily at
work at the heart and hearth of every home, contaminating and corrupt-
ing all authority... blurs the boundaries between authoritative third-­
person and first-­person narratives” (Weber,. – 31). In other words,
it is the degree to which the formal qualities of the narrative shift, render-
ing us uncertain from where the story is being told (is it “art” or “scholar-
ship”?), that marks Hoffman’s story as uncanny.
     Unsurprisingly, then, as Freud tells it, anxiety is the most common af-
fect associated with the uncanny. Anxiety is also the most common af-
fect, from a disciplinary standpoint within the disciplined university, as-
sociated with being driven by a research project whose specific goals and
outcomes cannot be articulated from the outset. This insight emerges not
only from psychoanalytic but also from critical pedagogical literature—
indeed, the two are inextricably intertwined in my thinking. For exam-
ple, when I teach Brazilian pedagogical activist and theorist Paolo Freire’s
work in my graduate courses I highlight the way that he draws our atten-
tion not only to conscious emotional economies (those moments when a
reaction to a teacher or a text can be clearly articulated and accounted for
in positive or negative terms) but also to affective economies — those mo-
ments when reactions and bodily instincts or drives run the pedagogical
show (be it curiosity or anxiety or both in equal measure).
     In his  Teachers as Cultural Workers: Letters to Those Who Dare
Teach, Freire describes the act of studying (the work of the university)
as a demanding occupation filled with emotion: pain (before difficult or
seemingly uninteresting materials), pleasure (when points of connection
emerge), victory (the “ah-­ha” moments), defeat (when one feels at a loss),
doubt (when one feels insecure or evaluated harshly), relief (when that
insecurity vanishes), and curiosity (when faced with an unknown that,
for whatever reason, emerges as alluring). This last, curiosity, with its po-


4. tential for drawing us in unpredictable new directions, potently resists the
logics of what Freire () calls the banking model of education. In the
pedagogical economy of the banking model, professors have their hands
on the reins of knowledge at all times, and aims to hand these over, with
time, to their students. Rather than nurturing an irrepressible, unruly,
and situated curiosity, the banking model understands knowledge as in-
formation bits that are depositable, retrievable, and usable at some mo-
ment completely separate from the original scene of learning — like a tool
in a toolkit that, once one knows how to use it, can be wielded, to the same
effect, at any given moment. This is one of the reasons that the banking
model retains such power: it protects us — all of us! — from the anxiety
associated with ignorance, an anxiety that emerges all too quickly in the
face of modes of interdisciplinarity that bring with them the very real pos-
sibility of experiencing ourselves as uninformed or incapable (or, in to-
day’s university, unaccountable in the sense of not being easily translatable
into standard metric equivalencies).
    As Freud distinguishes in Beyond the Pleasure Principle ([] ),
unlike fear, anxiety is a structure without object, or, rather, without pre-
dictable object. If one has something to be afraid of — that one’s research
project will fail to account for an important text in the field or to accu-
rately portray the perspective of one of the field’s key thinkers — one’s
anxiety is transformed to fear: there is an object grounding the affect, and
the steps to take to protect oneself are clear. Anxiety, on the other hand,
does not have an object; it is the lack of defined and stable, predictable
object that is constitutive of anxiety in its strong form. The problem with
anxiety is that one never knows from where an attack might come —when
one crosses many boundaries, the attack (the unknown; the unexpected)
might come from anywhere. Characterized in this way, one might see why
anxiety is a condition that is often ascribed to the experience of working
research-­creationally, and why the uncanny is a useful structure to think
with in unpacking research-­creation as a site of both promise and threat.
    When confronting the interdisciplinary, in my experience, anxieties of
disciplinary specialization are matched only by anxieties of dissolution:
that the value of specialized knowledge might dissolve into an intellectual
free-­for-­all, as the security of monogamous (read: serious, committed,
and exclusive) disciplinary relations are challenged, opening themselves
up to the amory of the unmasterable, unpredictable, and untamable — the


eros of Haraway’s dog. The problem lies, when it comes to the approach
to research-­creation that I am teasing out in this book, less in the seeming
opposition between a “passionate drive” and a “disciplinary accountabil-
ity” than in rules of propriety and exclusion that too often come with a
commitment to a disciplinary home. As an uncanny practice, research-­
creation threatens us with never fully being at home, disciplinarily speak-
ing, and this anxiety of insufficiency (research-­creation’s most oft-­named
peril) cannot help but erupt in the same breath as the exhilaration of cre-
ative pluripotency (its most oft-­named promise).
    It is this very quality, of course, that has historically been argued as
the site of political and intellectual potential for the interdisciplinary hu-
manities. As the editors of the de-­, dis-­, ex-, volume The Anxiety of Inter-
disciplinarity assert, “It is only by maintaining the degree of uncertainty
that interdisciplinary work bears — while simultaneously producing cri-
tiques of earlier sites of interdisciplinary practice — that new sites can be
progressively opened up” (Coles and Defert, iii). These new sites, of
which research-­creation can be understood as one of the most interesting
contemporary instantiations, combine the rhetoric of revolutionary po-
tential with the fear that intellectual promiscuity might sully disciplinary
property and propriety (the realm of the oikos and oikonomia).17
    While the anxiety of interdisciplinarity is sometimes grounded in con-
cerns over how to best serve an object of analysis, or tied to concerns over
how a project might be read within a system — the university — whose
acknowledgment and valuation is necessary for professional stability and
advancement, pedagogically speaking it is also linked to the assertion
that we can never know, ahead of time, where and how value will be ar-
ticulated in the pedagogical encounter, especially when those encounters
cross disciplines. While the affectivity of (disciplinary) mutual recogni-
tion is useful for its generative power — for the excitability, passion, and
even encouragement that it can promote — it is nothing as an aim in itself.
To facilitate the economy of “I know and now you know” ad infinitum is
to be entrenched within the banking model oh-­so-­dear to the contem-
porary neoliberal university and its standardized deliverables — as if the
pedagogical scene could be conferred via prerecorded video sound bites
and registered learning outcomes.
    Some training works this way, certainly. But not critical thinking, not
political awareness, and not research-­creation. In rejecting mutual under-


standing and predetermined knowledge bits as the central pedagogical
values, and in asserting that the value of an educational encounter cannot
be predicted and, more importantly, can only sometimes be recognized
while it is happening — what psychoanalysis calls deferred effect or après
coup (Laplanche ) — the process of education, as both act and entan-
glement, can only live in tension with the drive toward standardization.
   It is in this context that the territorial and affective tensions that struc-
ture the uncanny are useful for research-­creation. At its most generative,
the affective discomfort of the uncanny invites us to question what it
means to answer (and ask) a (research) question from within disciplin-
ary boundaries that are never (fully) our own, and it reconfigures how we
understand our subjects and objects of study by opening us up to discipli-
narily foreign methodologies and questions. The uncanny is never — can
never be—constative, predicted, or prepared for. The uncanny is an emer-
gent phenomenon. It names the experience of being both at home and not,
intellectually speaking, disciplinarily speaking, affectively speaking. It is
never certain; it is always propositional and responsively in the encoun-
ter. And it is never comfortable. This is why, when it comes to research-­
creation, an approach that would de facto raise artistic practice to the
status of research by recognizing its inherent knowledge bases and po-
tentials, while valuable and interesting, is not enough. To do so (to include
art, or other historically jettisoned sites, into the university) is an impor-
tant step. But if, in so doing, art (among other nontraditional scholarly
practices) is asked simply to accede to the reigning logics of the university
without being allowed to remake the university through its presence, to
render the university a site of potential uncanniness by rendering the fa-
miliar unfamiliar, then more is needed.
   To help us think about this further, I turn to two important texts
that work specifically to understand the formal intervention modeled
by research-­creation within university contexts. The first is Christopher
Frayling’s germinal  essay “Research in Art and Design,” which ad-
dresses itself to the (then) new development of fine arts PhD programs
in the UK. The second is Owen Chapman and Kim Sawchuk’s 
“Research-­Creation: Intervention, Analysis and ‘Family Resemblances,’”
an essay that refers to and extends from Frayling’s earlier distinctions, but
now in the context of a similar, though not identical, emergence (research-­
creation PhDs) in Canada. These essays participate in a body of literature


Discipline(s)by scholars attempting, each in unique geographical, university, and de-
partmental locations, to find language that is capacious enough to speak
to the variety of practices that their students and colleagues, and they
themselves, are developing while also being narrow enough to offer some
methodological traction for those seeking to work within the genre(s).18
    Frayling’s short, yet influential, essay is mostly concerned with un-
packing inherited caricatures that accrue to the figures of the artist (ex-
pressive), designer (experimental), and scientist (rational or mad), and in
teasing out the many ways that the idea of research in art and design was
circulating through the s and s art academy in England. Build-
ing on Herbert Read’s  Education through Art, the essay proposes
three ways of parsing research practices relevant to art and design (these
have had enormous impact on how research-­creation and other allied
programs have developed in the twenty-­five years since the text was first
published): research into art and design, research through art and design,
and research for art and design (, 5).