
    Owen Chapman’s  Alphabet Radio provides a useful example for
thinking through the relationship between Bowker and Star’s under-
standing of the boundary object and my arguments regarding research-­
creation. Chapman, an associate professor in the Department of Com-
munication Studies at Concordia University in Montreal, describes
Alphabet Radio thus:
   Alphabet Radio is one part of a larger project called Audio Toy Box. A
   handmade interactive electronic device made out of cardboard, it re-
   sponds to decks of specialized cards featuring images, symbols, icons,
   colours, and other visual cues. Each card has an embedded rfid chip
   that causes a unique sound to playback when the card is presented to the
   integrated rfid reader. These sounds, related to the featured images,
   include words, syllables, phonetic sounds, musical elements and other
   short audio files — each crafted with specific pedagogical/therapeutic
   goals in mind. Sounds are stored on easy to switch sd memory chips
   (commonly used in digital cameras). Different sets of memory chips
   along with different decks of cards allow a user to create tailor-­made,
   repetitive, audio play/learning experiences.



   diagnosed with “global developmental delays” when she was quite
   young. The larger Audio Toy Box project (of which Alphabet Radio is
   one component) comes out of my desire to create new, more creative
   and engaging, ways of living and working with these so-­called delays
   and seeks to present alternative frameworks for developing and shar-
   ing non-­ableist, affordable and adaptable/customizable pedagogical
   toy designs. The project approaches the study of disability from an
   artistic and interdisciplinary perspective and questions cultural nar-
   ratives and discourses that posit disability as inherently tragic for indi-
   viduals and families.26
    Alphabet Radio is a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council–
funded research-­creation project. It functions as a diy social-­art inter-
vention, a maker-­lab object, and a pedagogical tool in critical disability
studies contexts. As Chapman conceives of it, it is all of these things at
once, and properly none of them. I’d like to suggest that what allows Al-
phabet Radio to function as a boundary object not solely claimable by any
one context is that, while remaining legible to a number of disciplinary
sites, it fails to fully fulfill the criteria of any one disciplinary location. In
some ways, it is an in-­coherent object. That is, Alphabet Radio speaks well
enough to each disciplinary context to be legible and meaningful, without
fitting so well as to be naturalized within any of them.
    This is compounded by the fact that Alphabet Radio is but one ele-
ment of Chapman’s larger Audio Toy Box project. Audio Toy Box adds into
the mix the production of academic writing and the desire to contribute
to both the disciplines of communications studies and interdisciplinary
field of critical disability studies, as well as artistic, designerly, and activ-
ist sites. Audio Toy Box has outputs that are academic, outputs that are
artistic, and outputs that are activist, and each of these sets of research
outputs are (designed to be) weighted equally, with the research question
itself hovering between them, and addressed and cared for differently by
each of them. The project is not built to circulate in the art world, nor
the world of marketable pedagogical disability aids, nor to embody the
gadget-­gear-­cool-­factor badge of maker-­lab circulation, nor the university.
It promiscuously inhabits all of these spaces, speaking to each, resisting
being fully claimed by any one disciplinary location while being nonethe-



Haraway ’ s Dog 



less legible across all of them. Holding its own as a research-­creational
object that denaturalizes the givens of each of the disciplinary spaces at
stake, it places curiosity, desire, and love at the helm.
   Another example we could turn to in this context is artist and academic
Beatriz da Costa’s Pigeonblog ( – 8). Part art-­as-­social-­practice/new-­
genre public art, part academic intervention, part citizen science, and part
activism, Pigeonblog is a multimodal project that, at its core, functions as
a speculative proposition: What if we all worked in minimally invasive
ways to generate local knowledge, collaboratively, in our communities,
on complex issues related to social and climate justice? What kinds of
worlds might we be able to generate by cultivating more grassroots, cre-
ative, accessible relationships to technoscientific knowledge production?
And what role might art play in such reworldings?
   Pigeonblog was developed specifically to track air quality in local neigh-
borhoods and visualize the information gathered online and in exhibition
(see da Costa n.d.). For the project, da Costa (in collaboration with her
ace grad students at the University of California, Irvine, Cina Hazegh
and Kevin Ponto) used custom-­built miniature air pollution – sensing
devices, working with the pigeons and their fanciers over many months
to develop a pack the pigeons would agree to fly (Haraway,. – 24).
These packs enabled the pigeons to send air-­quality information in real
time to an online server, which was then translated into a visualization
schema using a Google map of the area the pigeons were flying through.
   Like Chapman’s Audio Toy Box, Pigeonblog was “published” in multiple
forms — public performance, gallery exhibition, and written text — with
each of these publication modes holding equal weight. It required that da
Costa perform as artist, legible within the field of art-­as-­social-­practice;
as engineer, working collaboratively on microelectronics with other engi-
neers; as a theorist of what da Costa framed as tactical biopolitics. and as
social justice activist attentive to multispecies relations and ethics. As da
Costa writes in her project statement “Interspecies Coproduction in the
Pursuit of Resistant Action,” “Pigeonblog attempted to start a discussion
about possible new forms of co-­habitation in our changing urban ecologies
and made visible an already existing world of human-­pigeon inter­action.
At a time where species boundaries are being actively reconstructed on
the molecular level, a re-­investigation of human to non-­human animal
relationships is necessary.. This call for ecological and technoscientific


            


    justice lies at the core of this and much, if not all, of da Costa’s work. Her
work models a research-­creational approach to multispecies ethics and
pedagogy that speaks across academic and nonacademic divides, one that
uses artistic forms as spectacular lures and mobilizers of affect and action.
    Research-­creation, as modeled by Chapman and da Costa, is a par-
ticular kind of curiosity-­driven, inter-­or transdisciplinary method, a
method that learns from the interdisciplinary humanities, but that adds
to these debates by crossing “practice” and “theory” lines in ways that, like
Krauss’s expanded field, tumbles outside of our attempts to contain them,
and that demands new literacies (indeed, taught by Krauss we could argue
for research-­creation as something that hovers ambivalently between “art
and not-­art” and “research and not-­research”). To do research-­creation in
this way is to produce objects that work not only across discursive fields
but challenge the norms of those fields, producing boundary objects that
insist on being undutiful. Pointing to the ways that disciplinary knowl-
edge claims (“sorting things out”) always highlight certain elements while
masking others, research-­creation, thus figured, insists that curiosity, in
all its erotic pluripotency, be its guide, pushing us to tell new stories in the
academy, stories that denaturalize singular disciplinary locations while
nomadically claiming space within all of them. stories that unmake as
much as they remake how we understand what we are doing as maker-
thinkers in the — disciplined and disciplining — university today.




            

Discipline(s)



   As Freud was himself forced to acknowledge, however implicitly, the uncanny...
   calls into question the basis of all judgment; the position from which distinctions
   are drawn. This mixing of genres poses a challenge to a notion of scholarship that
   still insists that knowing and not knowing are mutually exclusive.


   The truly revolutionary insight—the truly revolutionary pedagogy discovered by
   Freud—consists in showing the ways in which ignorance itself can teach us some-
   thing, become itself instructive.



L I T E R A R Y C R I T I C A N D P S Y C H O A N A L Y T I C theorist Shoshana Felman be-
gins her  book, Jacques Lacan and the Adventure of Insight, with the
following anecdote: While working on her PhD in France, Felman finds
herself attracted, at the moment she decides to buy a copy of Lacan’s infa-
mously dense  collection of essays entitled Ecrits, by the very warn-
ings she receives to stay away from it — to remain ignorant. “Don’t buy it,”
says a kindly storekeeper, looking out for his student clientele by protect-
ing them from Lacan’s famed opacity of language. However, as Felman
tells it, rather than functioning as a deterrent, the storekeeper’s prohibi-
tion (like Badger’s warning to Charm) works not to quash but to ignite
her curiosity. It becomes an invitation to question why, in an academic
environment (a university bookstore), one might possibly be advised not
to learn.
    Felman addresses herself, in the wake of this experience, to a “his-
tory of reading [that] has accustomed us to the assumption — usually
unquestioned — that [the point of] reading is finding meaning” (, 45).
Reflecting on this, Felman asks us to shift our pedagogical habits from a
practice of searching for the known or knowable, the manifest content of
a reading practice, to a reading (and research) practice that is attentive
to the aesthetic, excessive dimensions of knowledge. She invites us to ca-
thect not only the content of (in this case) the Lacanian text, but its poetic,
excessive, and difficult form.
    I first read Felman’s book over a decade ago, followed, soon after, by the
other book I cite above, philosopher and literary theorist Samuel Weber’s
 The Legend of Freud. At the time, I was beginning a dissertation on
interdisciplinary pedagogy, and both Felman’s and Weber’s invitations
to cultivate a robust relationship with the “pedagogical unknown” struck
me as fruitful. Today, a good thirty years since their publication, these
texts still touch me; their quintessentially poststructuralist stance seem-
ing both out of fashion and yet, somehow, needed more than ever.
    Informed by perspectives such as Felman’s and Weber’s, this chapter
asks: How can we create spaces that bring the terms research and creation
together in the context of the university in such a way that they denatu-
ralize and displace each other, allowing sites of ignorance and curiosity
to flourish?1 How might we best mobilize research-­creation as a site of re-
sistance and remaking within ever-­more-­corporatized university spaces?
How to claim a term (research-­creation) so easily disciplined in creative
and knowledge economies, and interrogate it in renewed ways that open
up its possibilities rather than consolidate and instrumentalize them?
This line of questioning emerges from years of teaching in which I ask
self-­identified artists and art historians to think about what distinguishes
a research-­creational approach from other ways they have been taught to
do things in art and art history. In this context, and as I understand and
teach it, research-­creation speaks with and to a long history of debate in
the arts and humanities on the promises and perils of the interdisciplinary.


Discipline(s)stories (Frank, Klein, 2 – 3; Moran,. – 15). One of
the most common origin stories for the critical interdisciplinarity of the
late twentieth century, as we inherit it in North America, is the post-­
intellectual revolution marked (and, by some accounts, inaugurated) by
the May  Paris uprisings. Often highlighted in this “post-­” ver-
sion of the story is the impact of a certain wave of European thinking on
the US and Canadian theoretical landscape that achieved its most vis-
ible form in s poststructuralisms and s multiculturalisms. These
were politically grounded academic approaches that, even as they came
under fire and were remade through critique and engagement — by, for
example, feminist materialists insisting on situated research within post-
structuralist theory and Indigenous scholars highlighting the erasure
of Indigeneity in critical race discourse — worked to challenge exist-
ing structures of knowledge and education. Asking not only what gets
to count as “knowledge” (objects and methods of study) but who gets to
count as a scholarly knowledge maker (the inclusion and valuation of dif-
ferent voices and perspectives, different bodies, within the academy) and
how scholarly knowledge is allowed to be transmitted (a question of writ-
erly vocality, most commonly), critical interdisciplinarity, as it emerged
between the s and the s, hand in glove with the rise of poststruc-
turalist, feminist, queer, and critical race theoretical approaches, asserted
that the relation between what we think that we know and who we think that
we are is never straightforward.
   To work interdisciplinarily, on this reading, is to attend to who is pro-
ducing knowledge and how that knowledge is being produced in ways that
defamiliarize and reorient discipline from identity to act — to a thing one
does rather than a thing one is (Foucault ). This shift doesn’t deny the
need for training in the specificities of a discipline, nor does it preclude
disciplinarily coherent work. It simply places the research question first
and lets the necessary disciplinary skills follow. Recalling Haraway’s dog,
instead of a research question emerging from disciplinary histories and
habits (“Ah! No one in the field has written a monograph on thus and such
an artist” or “No one in the field has attempted to analyze thus and such
new aesthetic form”), the methods, tools, and approaches used, that is, the
specific skills and literacies needed to pursue a research question or prob-
lem, are determined as a back-­formation from the question or problem itself.


4. As Bill Readings suggests, in his prescient The University in Ruins: our
job, here, is to orient ourselves toward “not a generalized interdisciplinary
space but a certain rhythm of disciplinary attachment and detachment,
which is designed so as not to let the question of disciplinarity disappear, sink
into routine” (, 1emphasis added).4
    Research-­creation, taken as critical interdisciplinary praxis, asks us to
attend to how we habitually justify our research through disciplinary sto-
ries, those that we tell and those we have been told along the way. It also,
as I have been describing it, asks us to attend to the form of those stories. A
research-­creational approach not only asks us to attend to whether we per-
sonalize our writerly voice, render it poetic, or write in a “neutral” voice of
authority; it asks us to question whether writing, on a page, in an article
or book format, is, indeed, the appropriate, most effective, persuasive, or
interesting way to “write” our research. What if the most powerful way
to communicate the research embodied within a certain “chapter” is not
to write about it on a page, but to “write” it through video? Or in a mul-
timedia installation? Or with a live performance event? Or through an
art-­activist intervention? How do we begin to understand these latter as
“publications” of research that can be tied up with, and be disseminated as
part and parcel of, a larger academic research project, viable and judicable
(and citable!) within university (and university-­adjacent) cultures?
    As with any scholarly work, the need to assess, peer review, and ren-
der citable research-­creation projects requires experts in each of the rel-
evant disciplinary fields, ready and willing to work together to assess the
value—disciplinary and interdisciplinary—of the work. This, for the most
part (in my experience), works just fine for, say, a doctoral defense, as long
as all adjudicating members are willing to listen when a colleague from a
neighboring field explains why what may seem banal from the perspec-
tive of one field is, in fact, important, even innovative, to another. The
assessment problem in research-­creation emerges less at the level of an
individual masters or doctoral defense (where the terms for success can
be developed in camera and in situ) than at the level of the standardized
translation frameworks needed to generalize the form — and value — of
the work to an institution or granting body that is assessing or accrediting
the work at a remove.5
    In contexts such as annual evaluations (at my own home institution
we are required to submit our outputs yearly to a committee that then as-


 Discipline(s)sesses their value relative to the work of our colleagues and assigns our sal-
ary increments accordingly), research-­creation outputs, because of their
newness, are most often coded in ways that have been developed within
the fine arts to explain artistic outputs to other areas of the university for
promotion and advancement. For example, a large-­scale solo exhibition
in a top museum might be translated as a single-­authored book; a group
exhibition in a local gallery might be translated as a chapter in an edited
volume at a low-­ranking press. While these translations are expedient,
emerging from an attempt to find impact equivalences, they often fail to
account for the specificity of research-­creation at the level of innovation
as well as of labor.
   I am thinking here of a recent graduate, Michael Woolley, who, on Sep-
tember 14,, defended a research-­creation ma in the History of Art,
Design, and Visual Culture investigating debates in performance art doc-
umentation through theory, history, and artistic practice. Woolley’s thesis
was composed of three formal elements: a written document of . pages,
Performance and Its Documents: Revisiting Debates in Performance Art
Documentation; an exhibition, Performative Documents and the Labouring
Body, which ran from August. to September 16,, in the department’s
public gallery (the departmental standard for mfa candidates); and a live
performance-­lecture given the evening of August 24,. Each element
worked to communicate and render political and palpable an entrenched
and complex debate, ongoing since the s in performance art prac-
tice and theory, surrounding the status of the document in relation to
the live act. And each element did so through a different formal strategy:
the written document mobilizing performative writing (Phelan ; Spry
) to retell and reinvestigate the story of performance art’s relation to
documentation in a contemporary context; the photo, video, and sound-­
based installation rendering the very act of researching and writing the
thesis visible through an intimate, reflexive, and vulnerable documenta-
tion practice; the live performance-­lecture anatomizing the historical de-
bates through a live, yet always already mediated body, doubled uncannily
across the spaces and pages of Woolley’s multimodal thesis.6
   Requiring more of both Woolley and his thesis committee than a tra-
ditional MA thesis would have done, the project’s value exceeded what the
university’s metrics schemes are designed to capture. Not simply or fully
“art,” nor simply or fully “art history and theory,” yet mobilizing artistic,



