
Unmaking an archaeosphere, through these micro-trajectories, points to its materiality.
From formation through to erosion and extraction, the material flow of sand unfolds itself.
Its becoming is mediated through geological and human forces alike. Sand acts as a fluid
medium. It is always flowing, until something prevents it from doing so. At that moment
it crystallizes out as land, as buildings, as microchips – depending on the form that its
composition takes and the role that modern infrastructures play. In its different formations,
sand is constitutive of human life: the land we live on, the houses we dwell in, the digital
infrastructures we rely on. The difference between a sand grain originating from the desert
or the sea can only be observed through a microscope. Whereas erosion and segregation
in rivers lead to irregular movement and thus an irregular shape, sand steadily moved by
wind features a round shape. This round sand is considered useless for further industrial
processing. Material value here is measured by economic value. Such measurements do
not take into account the price of losing one's home, a habitat, or an ecosystem. Mining
frequently causes ground subsidence, which in turn causes flooding, which eventually
causes the disappearance of entire areas of land.

What becomes apparent when walking through the sand mines in Luzon and ending up
in a white lab in Singapore are the asymmetries and limitations inherent in all making.
The unmaking of design, whether a microchip, a brick, a building, or an island – all



human-made infrastructures – reveals what design covers up. The hidden infrastructures
of extraction that keep sand in flow are brought to the foreground. Once they are made
into a microchip, sand is forever short-circuited from its return to the riverbed. In enacting
its potential for electronic processing, sand’s original territory of an island is erased, soon
disappearing altogether.





Grafoscopio

Collaborative coding practices are an unmaking, a specific instance of descriptive yet
productive deconstruction. For the purposes of analytical reconstitution, a group at the
Critical Media Lab Basel seeks to open an investigation, one made possible by a coded
script that accesses and evaluates data in the context of a software toolset for research.
Potential applications include data journalism and the Digital Humanities. In contrast to
the first exploration on additive design and D printing, where material aspects and the
sociotechnical are hidden, here software is designed to reveal and unmake the digital
environment it is built within and relies upon. This software toolset, called Grafoscopio
(GS), is being developed at the Colombian hackerspace HackBo, which is located in the
city of Bogotá. The space was founded in the year  as a membership-based collec-
tive to foster engagement with a variety of technocultural matters such as DIY hardware
projects, tinkering with Arduino, open source software projects, science and math, as
well as internet activism. GS is conceived and coordinated by design researcher Offray
Vladimir Luna Cárdenas and is:

     a moldable tool for interactive documentation and data visualization, that is being
     used in citizen, garage  open science, reproducible research, (h)ac(k)tivism,
     open  community innovation, domain specific visualization and data journal-
     ism, and has a lot of other potential uses. [...] Grafoscopio integrates simple and
                       MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                  




     self-contained 'pocket infrastructures' that can be executed on/off-line from a
     USB thumb drive, a Raspberry Pi-like computer, a modest server, or any hard-
     ware in between and beyond.

Grafoscopio is at once a note-taking application, a publishing suite, and an interactive tool
for data exploration and visualization. It runs within the Pharo Smalltalk environment, an
integrated operating system, development environment, and programming language. Similar
to Oracle's Java, it can be executed on any hardware and in any operating system. Pharo
Smalltalk is itself a community-based open source project and a contemporary incarnation of
the historic programming language Smalltalk-, developed in  by Alan Kay, Dan Ingalls,
and Adele Goldberg. GS derives its versatility mainly from its technological functionality. Like
its more prominent relative, the Jupyter Notebook, it is possible to write and execute code
within documents edited in GS. By providing this functionality, the hands of users such as jour-
nalists or academics are extended towards epistemic practices and techniques of unmaking.
The software's functionality and basic Pharo Smalltalk coding skills can be learned through
tutorials within the environment itself. However, the main way to get involved with GS is Data
Week, a workshop format cultivating the development and use of GS.





While Luna Cárdenas is the main driver behind GS and has done the bulk of its programming
himself, he regularly hosts Data Weeks at HackBo to introduce people to the environment
and develop it further. Data Week sessions take up civic concerns in the context of Open



Data and internet activism, that is, orientations toward legislative action and governmental
campaigns on digital or environmental issues. Participants include software engineers as well
as journalists and academics. One example of a basic critical exercise deployed within this
format is the Data Selfie. Participants learn to call up data from Twitter profiles of themselves
as well as politicians through the Twitter API and render so called Data Selfies – visualizing
the quantitative relations between the tweets, retweets, and replies a profile has accumulated.

During these Data Weeks, the collaborative coding and making of a digital infrastructure
enabled its users to practice an extended form of unmaking – deconstructing or analyzing
as well as re-presenting, for instance, political rhetoric and stances. Data Selfies of some
politicians, for example, revealed evidence of the unidirectionality of their communication
on social media. This practice or set of practices characteristically combined the opening
up of technological platforms, the cultivation of basic coding skills, the promotion of a
rather quantitative data analysis approach (including visualization with a critical civic
concern), the connection to political discourse, and community building. Collaborative
coding, then, might also be a form of unmaking of knowledge hierarchies. Collectively,
participants learn to break down the technological barriers of access to infrastructure and
information, removing the hurdles faced by those not professionally trained in a techno-
logical field. Ultimately, such a modulation of practices by hacking might be an unmaking
of these professional practices themselves, one that, in turn, reconfigures what it means
to conduct journalistic or academic investigations.

Acknowledging the necessary context-specificity of unmaking, GS figures as a moldable
tool that can be altered and adapted by its users. While it doesn't deploy glitches or subvert
the logic of programming languages, like some of the examples of 'queer computing' in
Jacob Gaboury's critical unmaking paper, this specific version of unmaking might nonethe-
less fulfill the requirements he formulates for such a practice: 'It would appear that queer
computation cannot simply offer an antinormative critique of digital media. Instead, it must
offer a reframing of the goals, drives, and interests of these media as technologies in which
queerness is necessarily situated'. Developing and deploying GS as a critical, subversive
tool in social and political contexts contributes to establishing a somewhat antinormative
approach to digital media and endows its users with the abilities to further understand and
possibly unmake their basic protocols and formats.

Unmaking Making

Making has strong connotations of expansion and exploration, as well as reflection. Philos-
opher and urban planner Donald Schön's monograph The Reflective Practitioner is a text of
high relevance for makers and their cultures. Schön questions how action and reflection
could ever be separated. Thinking and making constitute contiguously iterative loops of
perception and proprioception, activation and reactivation, immersion and reflection. For





all our talk of 'theory and practice', we have little practical evidence or substantial reason to
separate these things. More specifically, to understand the relationship between applicability
and context dependency in making, it is necessary to look at the various levels of abstraction
that are activated, and at the constellations which emerge in thinking and making processes.

The main function of abstraction is to extract, but also to distance something from concrete
experience and context. Abstraction is a strategy to enable easier manipulation, faster referencing,
and finally general applicability in the sense of synthesizing theories that are applicable to a wider
range to situations. Making, on the other hand, is an utterly bodily and affective activity,
a close engagement with very concrete materials and environments. Making is an arguably less
abstract affair than, for example, thinking in mental imagery or allegory.

In dance, rehearsing choreography without carrying out every movement is more abstract than
a final dance performance in front of an audience. Movements are carried out at a level of high
abstraction when a dancer is sitting in the subway, on the way to a rehearsal, or going through the
choreography with eyes closed. Even here, tiny micro-movements of the body are (re)enacted, a
disposition to carry out future movement. The bodily reenactment of the choreography is carried
out on different levels of mental-physical abstraction, and the resemblance between these is
maintained throughout scale. The dancer might think of these physico-mental run-throughs as
instances of the same choreography, as David Kirsch writes.

According to theories of embodied cognition, the minimal or dispositional reenactment of past
experiences are like the exercises of a dancer. We recall what we know – this is thinking with
concepts. Alva Noë understands conceptual deliberation as abstract reenactment, a reproduction
of past experience drawing upon a constellation of mental images, words, artifacts, and bodily
movement. Reenactments can be triggered internally as well as externally, and can manifest
themselves in the production of things internally or externally. The empiricist philosopher Henry
H. Price illustrates the principle of how these activations happen:

     [...] the 'activating' of any mental disposition is a matter of degree. Between the two
     extremes – complete latency and complete actualization – there are many interme-
     diate degrees of sub-activation. When the word 'cat' occurs, or a cat-like image, a
     whole series of concepts linked in one way or another with the concept cat may be in
     some degree brought to mind. It is true of me at all times that I am capable of recog-
     nizing mice, bowls of milk, fur, tigers, mammals, hearth-rugs, at any rate [...]. At all
     times I have memories of what all these diverse entities are like (in the dispositional
     sense of the word 'memory'). But if the word 'cat' occurs to my mind – or a cat-im-
     age or a physical cat-replica – then something comes to be true of me which is not


     true at all times. All these diverse memory-dispositions are to some degree excited
     or sub-activated. I am put into a state of readiness to recognize mice, bowls of milk,
     tigers, etc., if I should happen to perceive them; and also in a state of readiness to
     talk of such entities or produce images of them. I am ready to do these things, even
     though I do not actually do any of them.

Price goes on to explain how producing and iterating on drawings and clay models varies in
sketchiness or elaborateness, depending on how much knowledge we possess about that
thing, or how much we are able to formulate the relevant details during this process. Notably,
what we reenact during creative processes may vary in temporal and spatial scale. Parts of
objects can be reenacted as well as whole objects (which are parts of other objects themselves).




ing of the bottom-up organization of house-keeping by members of a housing co-operative by
combining things and tools (materiality) with words, figures and lines (abstraction), .

In processes which emphasize making – rather than thinking – the maker is working
with less abstract, cognitively heavier things, more embedded in a context and the
circumstances of the process. The maker of a D-printed model of an island needs to
have more detail than the creation of a mental image or a pencil drawing. The maker
also has to be concerned with the qualities of the D printer's filament, the qualities
of the tools, and the infrastructures being used. When making an island by pumping
sand into the sea, more consideration must be given to the environmental context, the





architecture and activities that will populate the island. As the materiality of the things
increases, the time and effort we need to invest to manipulate these things will change
drastically. Concomitantly, possibilities for embodied interaction increase, as meaningful
interaction within a context and a surroundings, in the form of a richness of detail. As
materiality increases, we lose abstraction, mobility, and general applicability.

A Non-conclusive Conclusion

These examples provide us with a fractal, splintered picture of making, unmaking, and
related thinking and practices. New insights and designs emerge as weak links and faint
activations in the making process. This is where the maker feels that something is not
right with the picture or something might be missing. Our fingers itch to change a line,
our eyes squint in an effort to refocus, things are rearranged to ease the tension. Past
experiences of the maker guide our focus to various features of the material, the possi-
bilities of the tools, and the affordances of the maker-in-space. New constellations like
additive design trigger mental images or inspire sketches on paper – aspects co-activate
each other by constantly rearranging the actual constellation of things. Here, implicit
embodied knowledge, at the peripheries of our attentions, is pulled in and find its sat-
isfactory place, setups in which makers find coherence between what they know about
the world and what they anticipate. Tools, materials involved in the making process, and
the space in which the making takes place – all these may differ in scale, but their power
to activate and promote elements of these constellations are the same. Each project or
project phase, framed as making or unmaking, locates itself somewhere on a continuum
between contextualized and abstract, functionalization and curiosity, done for use or
done out of 'pure' interest. In this, we resist the general characterization of these acts
as 'making' or 'unmaking' and instead understand the heterogeneity of both as instan-
tiated in each and every project or moment of engagement with and through materiality.

Schön, Donald. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think In Action, London: Temple Smith, .
Stein, Jesse Adams. 'The Political Imaginaries of D Printing: Prompting Mainstream Awareness
Stengers, Isabelle. Cosmopolitics I: The Science Wars, trans. Robert Bononno, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, .
Umweltbundesamt (ed.) Die Zukunft im Blick: D-Druck: Trendbericht zur Abschätzung der
Umweltwirkungen, Dessau-Roßlau: Umweltbundesamt, , https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/
sites/default/files/medien//publikationen/fachbroschuere_d_barrierefrei_.pdf.
    MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE   




     Drawing on
  Theory to Build/
 Unbuild Media, or
Lalalalalalalalala

   xtine burrough
          <>
   Lucy HG Solomon

     DRAWING ON THEORY TO BUILD_UNBUILD MEDIA,
              OR LALALALALALALALALA

                       XTINE BURROUGH <> LUCY HG SOLOMON

On Nov , , at : PM, xtine burrough wrote:

Hey Lucy,

I was looking at this call and thought about a dialog with you – are you in?

xxxooo



On Nov , , at : AM, Lucy HG Solomon wrote:

Hallo!

Yes, let's unbuild media! I've been thinking about my own sense of craft as part of techno-
logical building and thinking across networks. Each of our collaborations is built around a
shared practice that is feminist in its core structure, involving a sharing of credit, a sharing of
technologies, and a rethinking of how we work with(in) technology. Before us came women
technologists/artists who did not get big salaries at companies and weren't proclaimed art
stars like their male counterparts. They became educators and connectors.

We both critique capitalist systems through making – yours via usurping the existing system
of digital workers (mapping microorganisms and using nature’s logic to determine socioeconomic actions (with
Cesar Baio, as Cesar  Lois), plus LOIS’ last project on squirrel gentrification that talks about
economic issues in areas of urban sprawl, are also connected with technology’s relationship
to society (
Those are my first thoughts!

Lucy







Connections at the Dallas Museum of Art, -.




economic dynamics of a city's neighborhoods are both the variables for microbiological growth
and the organizing factor for sharing food (left to right: Stanford, Los Angeles, Durban), .



On Nov , , at : AM, xtine burrough wrote:

Hi Lucy,

Has your electricity been turned on yet? I’m so impressed you are working and writing while living
through those great Santa Ana winds. You are a true pioneer woman!

My first techno-mentor was my father, a programmer for the NY Department of Transportation
in the s. He taught me Basic on a TRS- when I was eight. I think that was important for
my understanding of how to be with technology: unafraid and experimental.

Many of my collaborations are with non-artists. I like being the artist/producer in the relationship.

For the artist, there is much to be gained from working with others outside our discipline, from
areas of expertise they bring to the conceptual development of the project to the practical
details. How do you prioritize some of these collaborative nuances?

Hugs,

xtine




of the Exit Signs, is one of the first projects developed in LabSynthE for Central Trak, .




On Nov , , at : PM, Lucy HG Solomon wrote:

Dear x,

I sometimes really do feel like a pioneer woman, with the birds and horse and this land, but also
an interloper in someone else's land – historically speaking. In another sense, we are both pio-
neering technologies. My women mentors showed me that you can carve new paths in technology
in a human-centered way. Your father's legacy marks the normalization of making with technology.

What does it mean to be making art, poised as we are not just in the Capitalocene, but in the
technologically saturated time of now? When you ask about shared practices, is that solely an
aspect of making in this digital time, where the sharing of information is at the basis for most
transactions? Networked transactions, cloud computing – our mechanisms incorporate a sharing
                        MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                            




of technological entities. With Cesar  Lois, we share authorship across the network, with human
actors and nature-based entities, prompting collaborations with labs and scientific researchers
(you discuss, the division of the labor within the collective, becomes even murkier when we
depend upon input from a nonhuman living organism, one whose authorship is unintentional.

Your work intersects with this as your collaborators are often 'invisible' and unvoiced, in
certain ways, although perhaps your work is about manifesting those hidden voices, pro-
viding that channel? I am thinking of the digital labor workforce as well as the unnamed
women in history. In my work, nature is what becomes divorced from the human reality
through the technological interface.
