
moral and the juridical. Michel Foucault, for instance, traces the genealogy of 'governmental'
reason, beginning from the reason of governance and lawmaking such as the execution and
torture of criminals, through to the historical shift from natural laws set by the church to those
set by science, and finally on to the laws of price and demand of the market. Whatever the
method of critique may be, it is meaningless if it doesn't speak to and against norms, values,
and political leanings.

The term 'conspiracy theory' from which Latour is protecting science is a legal category in itself.
It is the law that determines what is conspiracy theory and what is not. As such, the difference
between a critique and a conspiracy can only be made before the law. Bearing this in mind,
there is something about the verification processes of the CSI mindset to which we must pay
closer attention: the placement of evidence before the law. In certain legal systems, matters of
fact are questions that are answerable through the collation and construction of evidence, as
well as the inferences that such evidence allows. Matters of the law, on the other hand, are
those questions which can only be answered through recourse to the law, through its application.

 The issue is – and here is where the CSI mindset falls short – laws in our current era are con-
 tinuously suspended, placed under exception. Today, as Louise Amoore contends in her article
'Risk before Justice', the instruments of governance, 'take on the shape of diverse tactics rather
 than laws'. All juridical decisions are replaced with risk strategies that are implemented as
 exceptions to the law. Amoore gives the example of the memoranda for granting a US visa
 waiver to European citizens. Such memoranda are an indicative example of the suspension of,
 and exception to, the law. The law states that all European citizens are granted a visa waiver
 when entering the US. However, various memoranda – most notably the one made famous
 under the Trump administration – place this law under an exception that evaluates the potential
 risk that the passport holder poses to the US, statistically calculated in relation to their place
 of birth. The text of the agreement outlines the extralegal practices implemented, whereby
 individuals are screened and risk scored before travel. The law is no longer able to grant a visa
 waiver definitively, but rather relies on risk management strategies and extralegal practices.
 The danger of these practices is that, unlike the law, they are not limited in their application
 or measured against a certain notion of justice. For instance, the racial profiling of Muslim
 people on the London Underground would be prohibited under law, but is made possible
 through these extralegal maneuvers. According to Amoore, it is these extralegal practices and
 their relationship to the law that define norms. As a result, our understanding of the difference
 between law and norm becomes complicated.

Each of these risk practices 'defer sovereign decision'. Many legal activists are increasingly
inclined to reinstate laws, like human rights, against these exceptions. However, such actions
are futile when the law becomes so intertwined with its exception. Legal institutions and


     International Law , no.  (): p. .



judges have been replaced by risk management experts and mathematical models. Here, a
conversation with the law on the grounds of justice or rights becomes nearly impossible. These
so-called 'experts' act as witnesses that present evidence before the fact, evidence that is
meant to deny the fact its existence, to prevent it from happening. Under these circumstances
the threshold of what is permitted as evidence changes.

Testimony of the Maker

For evidence to be effective against these extralegal measures, they have to exist within its
threshold as evidence before the fact, or what we might call counter-risk or counter-specula-
tive evidence. The role of the critical maker under such a regime is to construct the matters
of fact as evidence that undermines the risk expert, countering the possible risks of financial,
military, border, and terrorism activities. They have to become an 'expert' under a different
administration of rights. Nonetheless, matters of fact have to be produced, put forth, related
extra-juridically to uncertain conditions, evidently and aesthetically. This is not a case of
revealing the hidden fetishes of facts in order to dismiss them. It is reveling in counter-facts
in order to dismantle the norm. It is making certain that the world remains uncertain – despite
its continuous capacity to calculate a certain type of risk.

Latour is right in claiming that: 'The critic is not the one who debunks, but the one who
assembles'. Evidence constructed against the extralegal is dolomite, a far richer and more
nuanced way of describing the translucent mineral. This is not the generic jug or the banal
rock. And it is at precisely this moment that matters of fact become matters of concern. It
is that which is made to sit in front of risk management techniques as that which is not
compatible with it, that which aims to change it. It is not the production of evidence in order
to maintain the authority of the law, but in order to reveal its impotence and undermine its
reliance on 'experts'. In such a scenario, the critical maker becomes a statistician, not in the
predictive financial model sense, but in Gabriel Tarde's sense of the sociologist as statistician;
this statistician is a forensic scientist of possibilities, someone who presents the evidence not
to satisfy the law beyond a shadow of doubt or towards certainty before a jury, but in order to
defy the norms however they may be performatively realized.

Effective critique is synonymous with a counter-testimony of a reliable witness. In the age of
extralegal risk management, legal practice is intertwined with technical forms of expertise.
In these conditions, the critical maker has to become a witness against the experts, able to
give evidence against their predicted events before they happen. With this goal in mind, the
critical maker – whether engineer, designer, or technologist – should bask in their technical
skill and professional expertise, rather than transforming themselves into the artist as amateur.

I will conclude by returning to the example I began with. Two years after the exhibition of
Heather Dewey-Hagborg's Stranger Visions, Parabon NanoLabs launched a DNA profiling
service to be used by the police. The news of the launch lead Dewey-Hagborg to extend her



critical efforts and begin a new project that aimed to reveal the limitations of this phenotyping
technology. The expertise she gained during the project allowed her to discover that NanoLabs
DNA profiling is not accurate enough to be used in criminal investigations.

Stranger Visions embraces a certain aesthetic, making the viewer gawk at the spectacular
possibilities of D printing. However, the critical element of the work lies in the way it under-
mines the extralegal tactics of the police, their reliance on shoddy DNA sampling to quantify
and calculate the risk of crime. Dewey-Hagborg's critique, however, would not have been
possible without drawing upon expertise in DNA profiling and computational practices that
allow her to undermine the practices of phenotype risk management. By developing her
proficiency in this field, Dewey-Hagborg became an expert witness, presenting scientific facts
as counter-evidence before the exceptional circumstances of the law.

     MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE   




   Unmaking:
Against General
 Applicability

   Critical Media Lab
(Merle Ibach, Michaela
 Büsse, Felix Gerloff,
 Viktor Bedö, Shintaro
Miyazaki  Jamie Allen)

      UNMAKING – AGAINST GENERAL APPLICABILITY
     CRITICAL MEDIA LAB (MERLE IBACH, MICHAELA BÜSSE, FELIX GERLOFF,
              VIKTOR BEDÖ, SHINTARO MIYAZAKI  JAMIE ALLEN)

As belief in the applicability and efficacy of DIY production, open-source, and method sharing
has broadened to include institutional hackathons and open-data-fueled and civic 'maker
weekends', taking stock and articulating how certain approaches 'work' or 'do not work' within
maker culture – and for progressive and expansive creator cultures more generally – continues
to be essential. 'Making' is a key concept that frames a host of more specific practices, lending
characteristic manual/moral, communal/communicational, aesthetic/ethical, and enacted/
economic inflections and values. Even simple historical, traditional, technological, or digital acts
of object and media creation, of art and design, but also of writing and thinking itself, can be
recast as 'making'. What is it that happens to the thinking and doing of such activities, when
such recasting is desired, chosen, projected, enforced, or assumed?

The use of, and reflection on, means of production and the shaping of materialities ignites
potentials for understandings that are as fundamental and intrinsic as they are 'disruptive' and
incisive to contemporary economies and assumptions of industrial societies. A fundamental
difficulty arises through genealogies of making, as scenes, cultures, and epistemological fram-
ings, when such techniques become homogenized, universalized, and devoid of the specificity,
situatedness, and necessarily tactical improvisations through which they needfully emerge. In
the writings that follow, our contribution takes up both practical and theoretical considerations
of critical making, and the always ambiguous and reactive stances for and against 'making' as
a cultural lens, valuation, and rubric.

The specificity of diverse practices crumbles the edifice of 'making'. By recognizing the hetero-
geneity of relations to making, we are against its general applicability as concept, motivation,
approach, and toolset. In these writings, we attempt means of breaking open 'making'. We
recognize 'making' as a neoliberal, modernist shibboleth – even if, as a concept and motivation,
it is still usefully distinct from centrally, mass-industrialist and productivist motivations, activities,
and economics. Often a justificatory excuse that converts 'unnecessary' action into something
necessary, that turns profligate endeavors into reasonable activities, it is the rhetorical edifice
of 'making' itself that needs to be unconstructed, to be unmade. This process is necessary to
determine which aspects of making and maker culture to keep, which we should just ignore,
and which we should throw away. 'Unmaking' is a broad, reflexive, and critical framing that
emphasizes the always ambiguous character of making, reversing operations that aren't always
in themselves truly emancipatory or progressive, and providing mirror-reflections for design,
art, and other undisciplined creation, when it is framed as 'making'.

We juxtapose four very different but resonant contexts, shorter explorations related to research
currently under way at Critical Media Lab Basel. We address these through different scales,






layers, and levels of materiality, beginning with additive design. This is complemented by
discussions of the micro-level of our built, designed, and made environments through work
on the materiality of sand and collaboratively made open source softwares and digital envi-
ronments. Reflections on the epistemological dynamics of making and thinking-making follow.
What kind of tradeoffs are made between the agility and transferability of practices, gained
through systemic abstraction and generalization, and the material and bodily engagements and
efficacies of individualized making? Idiosyncratic, individual explorations highlight how making
(and unmaking) are not one thing but specific orientations that arise in practice, in materiality.





Additive Design

 D printing is seen as an alternative to industrial manufacturing. It is a technique and technol-
 ogy charged with designerly as well as political promise. The potential for participation in, and
 democratization of, manufacturing processes, as well as a return of offshored production back
 to local communities and the unboxing of global supply-chains are amongst these promises.
 Through innovation-driven experiments, technophilic supporters – from the amateurism of
'maker space' culture to engineering in the building sector, biotechnology, or aerospace indus-
 tries – have projected practical, economic, and idealistic legitimacy onto D printing. Yet, the
 most common use of thermoplastic print technologies arises in prototyping practices, primarily
 in the Do-It-Yourself sector, an area which is neither industry oriented nor purely craft-based,
 and develops little of the projected promise of maker-marketing characterizations. Even as
 D printing is poised to transform some design and manufacturing processes, perhaps even


     responsibility, effectiveness, authenticity, and kit-ification. Questions raised included: is your experience
     of making sincere, legitimate, and genuine? How does making increase or reduce proximities,
     collectivities, autonomies, sufficiencies, and dependencies? How can we think 'outside the box' when
     everything comes in a box? Does making (need to) make a difference? Does making give us abilities to
     respond politically, ecologically, or economically?
     Umweltwirkungen, Dessau-Roßlau: Umweltbundesamt, , p. . https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/
     sites/default/files/medien//publikationen/fachbroschuere_d_barrierefrei_.pdf.

fundamentally, the majority of produced artifacts are copies of existing objects. These copies
no doubt reflect even more fundamental traditional social configurations, and will do so
for the foreseeable and prolonged future. Very popular items of everyday use like vases,
cups, simple mechanical parts, connectors, adapters, or decorative artifacts, are locked-in
designs that originate under conditions of industrial fabrication, and are therefore unlikely
to be manufactured in truly radically new ways. Additive manufacturing is explicitly defined
by Jesse A. Stein as: '[...] part of a system of technologies that also encompass digital
design (e.g. CAD files), feedstock (materials required to print matter, e.g. plastic spools),
and associated digital and physical infrastructure (e.g. the internet, hardware, energy,
space)'. Additive manufacturing does not only mean the addition of layers of material
onto a carrier plate: design education, designers, design tools, and material resources
necessarily complete their qualities in a reciprocal symbiosis. It is a globally networked
community, comprising the knowledge and practice of D printing, that embed them-
selves in and inform D additive manufactured designs, creating further layers of remixed,
transcultural knowledge. Thought of as a media technology, D printing operations don't
merely lead to new or alternative representations, but to fundamentally different design
methods and experiences of design and making processes.

Critical Media Lab's Merle Ibach (Junior PhD Researcher) explores additive design pro-
cesses and their ways of becoming. Merle's practice-based research explores two per-
spectives of additive manufacturing and D printing. On one hand, there are individual
aesthetic expectations associated with 'virtual qualities' prior to manufacturing. 'Mathemat-
ical pureness' and independence from statistical variation and morphology are given by
software paradigms and built-in settings. These are projected and infused when a physi-
cal model is made 'inside a computer' and then additively produced in the world. Ibach
understands that growing up and living with ergonomic, standardized, mass-produced,
industrial products creates tendencies for aesthetic homogeneity. On the other hand,
there are aesthetic qualities that emerge within the sociotechnical negotiation of particular
tendencies and interests across the spectrum suggested by actors like designers, CAD
software, STL-files (a file format for unstructured polygon surfaces), ABS-Filament (the
synthetic material, derived from petrochemical mineral oil), and D printers themselves.
What Isabelle Stengers, a philosopher of science, has called 'reciprocal capture'  also
describes a dual process of co-invention between a designer, a maker, and their tools.
However, while imagined as being deterministic, computational scripts, additive manu-
facturing, and digital design are reciprocal processes that are never fully duplicated. The
complexity of a first prototype, devised by one person alone, is manifested through a host
of systemic translations and technological transformations.

'In the computer', within CAD software, wireframe models are constructed that do not
 directly link form, geometry, and materiality as it will manifest 'outside the computer'.
 Instead, these links are purely mediated. Exported as a STL-file, the dimension-driven


                     MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                      




geometry of the vector-based model is algorithmically translated into surface polygons.
This transformation, amongst other changes, creates flattened, fractured elements from
curved and rounded surfaces. Elements can become grossly distorted in relation to
the chosen degree of approximation (e.g. size and density of polygons). The STL file
format often causes further syntax errors such as the doubling of object facets, gaps
between them, or incorrect assignment of their orientations. The file is then translated
by a D-printer software, into g-code. By slicing the model into layers, g-code contains
data and instructions with parameters like speed, XYZ-coordinates, and material feeder
movement, that later direct the stepper motors that move the print head. Through a
nozzle as small as . millimeters, heated up plastic filament is applied to the build
plate. In the process – imagined as a trajectory from imaginary representation toward
physical manifestation – an in-computer model is filtered into simple geometrical shapes,
reduced to polygon surfaces, sliced into layers, cut into short commands, and then finally
reconstituted by hot, fluid plastic with a shrinkage rate of around %.

During preliminary design processes, relations are formed and values negotiated whose
persistence are just as transient as they are 'rapid'. Whether printing a rare, mechanical
connection, a complex, lightweight structure, a residential house, or an artificial coral
reef, D printing embodies a promise – that at the end of every idealized design process
there could, or should, be a 'Print' button. Even if every application, in practice, actually
depends on another technology, all these applications are united in their basic operations.
Controlled by software, a printer applies material, layer by layer, onto a substrate, and
things appear. Particularly in prototyping operations, which is the iterative designing of
possible 'solutions', thermoplastic print technologies accelerate the development pro-
cess from first draft to a final (often commercial) product. Media materiality, as John
Durham Peters points out, provides more than just organizational structures.  It shifts
the paradigms of making, from ideation to design onward. Software is also continuously
updated, so its experience underlies a constant relearning and refining. Virtual design
environments are workspaces of endless iterations, of unhampered addition, removal,
multiplication, and scaling. Due to automated production, design through additive man-
ufacturing seems to us only determined by formal, aesthetic questions.

According to a report of the German Federal Environmental Agency, the overproduction
and defective production of 'more or less value-free items' tends towards the creation
of increased environmental pollution for humans and the environment. A good deal
of particulate matter is produced during additive manufacturing. Other issues include
the toxicity of the materials that are used for the filaments and their lack of recyclability.
Even the biodegradable plastic polylactide (PLA) that is often used as alternative to
petroleum-based plastics like ABS can only be composted through special industrial pro-
cedures. Furthermore, the printers have high power consumption in proportion to their
modest outcome of individual pieces. So far, D printing in total has a marginal impact



on the environment when compared to industrial manufacturing. But extrapolating its
effects onto a larger scale points to additive manufacturing as a potential harbinger of
a parallel ecological disaster.

D printing is both a technology and a socio-ecological concept. Through the principles of
D printing, distinctions between designer, manufacturer, distributor, and consumer become
reconfigured and realigned. The implicit regime programmed into additive manufacturing
eradicates the materiality of an object during its design process. 'Making' here – marketers
suppose – somehow loses its weight, its perfidy, its resistance. The material aspects of D
printing are left in the background, shifting attention away from the material resources and
chains of technical know-how and instrumentation required. In this imaginary of 'making',
things can be fabricated from any sort of material, any sort of synthetic structure. The design
ecosystem, simultaneously dematerialized and rematerialized, provokes changes and trans-
figurations to global ecosystems.





Sand

Our second field of exploration is based on the practice-based study of the loose granular
silicate material, sand. This work, conducted by Critical Media Lab's Junior PhD Researcher
Michaela Büsse, takes a grain of sand as an inter-scalar vehicle for reflection and critical prac-
tice. Sand, as a substance, combines geological time with human time, ecology with economy
with politics. Sand is both witness and object to  years of history, and it is of course not a
uniform, real, or imagined materiality. Defined only by its grain size, desert sand is different






from sand found in rivers or on beaches. Grain shape is rendered by environmental forces
such as water and wind, and compositions can be a varied amalgam of shells, plants, and
rocks. Sand contains disparate mineral compositions, consisting of quartz, magnetite, and
other oxides, and is in high demand for engineering purposes. Because of its rich mineral
composition, volcanic sand is of high economic value as well, particularly in places like Sin-
gapore and China, where the respective industries are concentrated. Sand is becoming:
becoming land, becoming industrial zones, becoming electronic goods, as a medium and
material of design and making. Japan, Singapore and Dubai use sand (also rocks, soil and
cement) as infill to increase the territory of their nations.

In Tokyo Bay, one of the biggest land reclamation areas sprawls out over  hectares.
On the Dubai coast, construction sites have added more than  kilometers of coastline
and over  hectares of landmass. Singapore's territories have expanded from 
hectares to  hectares, a growth in land of just over %. As opposed to diking – land
reclamation by enclosure and water removal, practiced in the Netherlands since the th
century – land reclamation by infill is additive manufacturing on a large scale. Ships get
loaded with sand that is shot with high pressure through a jet, displacing and expanding
seafloor into landmass. As floating D printers, they apply layer by layer of sand and
instantly create new coastlines and tracts of land. 'Human activity has effectively created
a new layer on the surface of the planet, made up of old bricks, cement, and rusting
metal. Geologists and archaeologists have started calling this layer the archaeosphere'.
