                    

In June , Maker Media announced that it had laid off its entire staff and ceased its
operations. Over the last  years, the company had successfully positioned itself as the
face of a self-proclaimed 'maker movement'. It had celebrated making, tinkering, and
DIYing with technology as educational leisure activity. It had organized local showcases
and written detailed tutorials for your next project, that crazy cyberpunk clock or smart
weather station. Its signature MAKE magazine had provided the guides for choosing
(read: buying) your next dev board or D printer, allowing you to finally build that ret-
ro camera or automate your home in your spare time. Maker Media's popularity and
influence have been undeniable, but not uncontroversial. Its ideology, lack of diversity,
and strategic choices (such as accepting DARPA funding), were subjected to critical
scrutiny from practitioners within the maker realm as well as the hackers, artists, and
cultural critics in adjacent fields.

The death knell of Maker Media gives us pause. It provides us with a moment to reflect
about making practices, about the ideologies and imperatives built into this so-called
movement. What constitutes better stuff when it comes down it, when we examine the
essence of how things are made and embedded into a social, economical, cultural,
political, and ecological fabric? Slick promises and good intentions often obscure a
non-solution with more undesirable and unintended consequences than you can fit on
a product poster. Nevertheless, you too can build this – provided you can spend €
in sensors, boards, and acrylic sheets, and have the luxury of at least two weeks of free
time to learn new skills and visit a local makerspace within their limited (or non-existent)
public opening hours. Who benefits from this making and who doesn't? During the giddy
rise of Maker Media-style making, these basic questions were passed over or waved
away with user research and agile methods involving mostly corporate stakeholders.

 But the gravesite of Maker Media might also be a garden, sprouting the early shoots of
 a new critical making. Makers are increasingly shaking off their initial blind enthusiasm
 to numerically control everything, renewing an interest in sociocultural histories and
 futures, as well as the environmental and economical implications of digital machines
 for subtracting, adding, transforming, and connecting materials. Whereas a decade ago
 many gaped starry-eyed at the possibilities of D printers and other DIY tech, a critical
 mass now points out that no service, tool, or piece of software is good, bad, or neutral
– or even free for that matter. Your cheap hardware from China is costing someone else
 their health and soil. In response, new critical initiatives are emerging in the shape of
 feminist makerspaces, local communal electronics depots, repair and upcycling com-
 munities, and research and education platforms centering around sustainable materials
 and open-source tools.

We've arrived at a crossroads. What was making? What is making? And perhaps most crit-
ically, what could making become? These are the questions this anthology investigates.
                                                                                           




The Maker is Dead. Long Live the Maker?

Shortly after the news of MAKE's demise, a discussion erupted on the net-time mailing list, a
critical eulogy that identified some strengths while pointing to many issues. Garnet Hertz took
issue with the brand's mission to transform preexisting DIY maker practices into a commercial
franchise. 'MAKE did a ton to help out this scene', he admitted, but they also 'whitewashed
a lot of interesting things (experimental art, hacktivism, strange design work, hacker culture,
interactive art, electronic music etc) – their paradigm of the franchise 'was an odd fit for DIY
culture'. The making we had was one commodified version, one possibility in a constellation
of broader making practices.

Others debated the maker's position in the creative economy. While the products created
may have had limited economic viability, perhaps this was not the main issue. Richard Sewell
argued that there is always value in learning through making. 'The greatest value of the maker
movement has been an explosion of people making things that don't entirely make sense and
are not intended as commercial ventures', he asserted, 'That's not an issue, that's the point.
They are learning to envision things and then make them and then learn from them, and they
are making their own marvels'. Making is a process and a practice, not just an outcome.

Others signaled the urgency of maintaining products and tools, and the importance of locally
available resources to do so. For Adrian McEwen, making should also be framed in terms of
repairs. 'We are facing many challenges: the climate emergency, labour conditions, plastic
everywhere, wealth inequality,' he observed, 'there's lots of work to be done [...] If we're
repairing our products more, then every town will need a bunch of people who can design
replacement parts and make the repairs [...] Open hardware will then have an advantage
because the schematics and designs will all be ready available for that. Making leans forward
into a more broken and more hyperlocal future.

These posts provide an autopsy whilst trying to revive the maker's healthier organs. Can we
really say the maker is dead? Hardly. The municipality of Amsterdam, for instance, is currently
rolling out publicly available shared makerspaces in the city's public libraries to facilitate st
century learning and 'citymaking' for children by teaching them how to use CNC machines
such as laser cutters and D printers. On the other hand, tinkerers, toy makers, shop display
producers, and other local creative professionals and amateurs in Amsterdam have seen
co-working spaces with digital fabrication facilities pop up – often with the funding from that
same municipality – and close business just a few years later, leaving questions of successful
maker business models and their relationship to precarious labour and tensions with activist
ideals largely unanswered.


     Archives/nettime-l-/msg.html.


Perhaps it is education, above all, where making has exerted the most influence. 'Some of
our best successes', stressed MAKE CEO Dale Dougherty, 'are in education'. 'The company
is failing as a business but not as mission', he claimed, leading him to wonder if the company
should reform as a non-profit. Tutorials and sample projects on platforms like Instructables
and MAKE have played an influential role in education, scaffolding the technological learn-
ing advocated in STE(A)M education paradigms in K- education in the US, and primary
and secondary education of young people in Europe. However, pedagogies to adequately
educate are still under review or awaiting a much-needed critical update. 'I see a potentially
interesting/exciting new direction that could come of the dissolution of MAKE's stronghold
in the realm of education', notes Minka Stoyanova; rather than simply 'teaching electronics
to kids', tech education could include 'teaching critical approaches to technology, teaching
media literacy, critical thinking, and environmental thinking'.

While this foray into education was (arguably) successful, it also contributed to creating a
population of makers lost without step-by-step project tutorials (Instructables), ready-made
kits (Arduino or other dev boards), plug-ins and proprietary software (Adobe suite, Rhinoc-
eros). Many beginning makers expected ideas-on-demand and immediate technical success,
lubricated with easy-to-use software tools that seamlessly connect to one another. These
padded conditions obscured how vectors, gcode, and transistors actually operate – and
how such technologies might intersect with economic, legislative, political, and cultural
developments. MAKE's culture, Chris Csikszentmihalyi concludes, 'encouraged a false con-
sciousness that might change how but not what is made'. In this environment, any potential
to alter or appropriate a tool's functionality was overshadowed by the seemingly endless
possibilities offered by the default settings. Too often, form followed a limit set of predefined
functionalities, resulting in everything looking the same. The creative became cookie-cutter.

Such critiques resonate with our own discontents as researchers and educators. In these
roles, we have studied the role of makerlabs in urban economies in Italy and the Netherlands
and taught in the digital fabrication workshop of an applied university. These activities have
meant grappling with how making might slot into education. In , a transdisciplinary
semester course named Makers Lab: Making as Research was developed to bridge higher
maker education informed by critical conceptual thought. This process of designing a maker
course was significantly inspired by participating in Fab Academy, a globally standardized
training course that takes place in local FabLabs like the one here in Amsterdam.


These firsthand experiences revealed the double-edged nature of making. Those who could
invest the time and money to participate learned to develop highly technical prototypes from
scratch: from creating molds to designing and milling PCBs. Careful tinkering with materials,
electronic components, and digital fabrication processes provided an embodied understand-
ing of technologies and their inherent malleability. There are endless ways to connect and
disconnect things, to configure and reconfigure objects. But it also taught us that there are
tradeoffs – whether cognitive, emotional, aesthetic, sociocultural – when negotiating the
affordances of tools and materials. Such knowledge seemed particularly fitting for polytechnic
higher education and applied research. But is there a strut missing from this educational
framework? Besides practical technical know-how and material knowledge, where are the
critical conceptual tools that would enable learners to imagine and develop maker projects
that can address the pressing political and ecological issues of our time?

In the process of putting together a syllabus for the course, it became clear that these
questions had also been asked in the Critical Making described by information scholar Matt
Ratto and the more object-centered strand developed by artist and designer Garnet Hertz.
Hertz calls to re-politicize maker culture by pointing to the deficiencies and problems with
making and the maker identity as successfully marketed by Maker Media. Critical Making
and related approaches like Critical Technical Practice instead seek to produce objects that
uncover injustice, highlight discrimination, and point to issues of power such as gender
inequality, surveillance, racism, and human rights. The aim is not simply to critique from
the outside, but to assess how one's own disciplinary framework and professional habitus
might be contributing to such inequalities. Such approaches highlight the potential of making
for generating knowledge and creating new critical perspectives. These, in turn, have con-
sequences for the way we imagine, position, and organize physical spaces for making and
whose agendas they should serve. They carve out a particular discursive space for makers
to grapple with our broader, messier array of contemporary problems. Rather than Silicon
Valley solutionism, they urge us to stay with the trouble.

The cultural practices MAKE drew upon, like DIY electronics, have existed much longer than
the brand. The company attempted to incorporate a scene of cultural producers, technical
practitioners, and casual hobbyists under the banner of makers. But in doing so, they largely
reduced making to technological tinkering for empowerment-entertainment, mainly for an
already powerful and affluent Western middle class. While often ignored, making always inter-
sected with class in a particular way. This relationship between class and making has been
leveraged strategically and politically before. One way to understand the maker phenomenon
is the latest incarnation of a longstanding drive to monetize 'non-discursive technical cultures'
which can be traced back at least to the Enlightenment, as Graham Harwood points out.



In its universal global vision, the MAKE version of maker culture excluded a plethora
of other practices and perspectives. It ignored historical linkages to politically engaged
and activist creative technical practices developed in hackerspaces and (media) art
collectives. It failed to address the problematic inheritances of its gendered and colo-
nialist past and present. And it broke its promise of generating jobs and intervening in
exploitative capitalist modes of global production. As Alice Yang reminds us: 'Most of
the actual makers of our electronic products are women of color working in factories in
the third and developing world.'

The end of MAKE signals a moment in which we might wonder how to fill the institutional/
 educational hole it leaves behind, and how it might be filled without falling in the same
 traps. But critical making has a legacy of its own that is informing the way courses in
 universities and art academies are structured. This presents us with an opportunity to
 take stock of a decade of critical making by revisiting the original ideas behind the term
– by looking both sideways and ahead. Who is the maker today, what is being made, and
 who benefits from contemporary makerly labour? And most importantly: what should
 be the next step?

This anthology gives space to critical makers to imagine the futures of their labs, tools,
material engagements, and knowledge production. Do we need updated models for
thought and practice? An open source based commons? New institutions or ways of
instituting and organizing? Different business models? Other avenues and contexts for
engaged technical practice? These questions take center stage and invite you to join the
conversation: in class, online, and in your (maker) communities. The goal of this book
is to provide makers, students, and ourselves with an overview that is both accessible
and theoretical. Written primarily from the perspective of engaged practitioners, we see
it resonating with people from a range of disciplines. In doing so, we hope to provide a
critically made book about critical making.

Structure of the Reader

This anthology features  contributions from designers, artists, hackers, makers, and
crafters, as well as activists, theorists, and scholars reflecting on contemporary maker
cultures. Throughout the book, we've consciously decided to avoid any hard distinction
between theory and practice. Some contributors describe in more detail how theory has
informed their practice, while others flip this equation, explaining how their practice has
led to different concepts and models for thinking. The reader is invited to draw further
connections between the overlapping or even entangled contributions. The overture of
the book is offered by Critical Making pioneers Matt Ratto  Garnet Hertz, who trace the
intellectual genealogy of the term while reflecting on their own pedagogical practices
in interdisciplinary learning. The sections that follow are organized into the following
four themes:



Matter that Matters: Material Engagements with a Cause

In the face of climate change, surveillance capitalism powered by blackboxed 'smart'
technologies, and the simultaneous material turn in the humanities, theories of making
are being articulated anew. The anthropocentric character in Western thought and prac-
tices has been seriously called into question. After all, look at where the 'progress' of our
supposedly productive design and engineering tendencies have led us. Whether stemming
from older theological thought or newer neoliberal mantras, the imperative of the human
to command and control, to dominate and domesticate, has become untenable. After the
linguistic turn, reducing the world to social constructs shuts our eyes to its vibrant mate-
riality, to the realm of active agents that shape, resist, and even speak through material
difference (for those who know how to listen). Viewed in this light, making becomes a
mutually transformative act between non-human and human, where material and discur-
sive actors continuously come into being together.

The contributors in this section center around this kind of engagement, advocating for new
articulations of critical making as a form of immanent critique. Rather than the all-too-
easy debunking and complaining of the outsider, they acknowledge their position within.
Here, thought is seen to have agency and action is always reflective (Graham Harwood,
and Maria Dada's post-critical counter-testimony of the maker). The more-than-human
maker does not make from scratch, but engages material that coexists alongside her as
always already-there. She is attentive to scale, to volume, and to the time of materiality.
She oscillates between making and unmaking, shifting between the abstract and contex-
tualized (Critical Media Lab, xtine burroughs <> Lucy HG Solomon). After the death of the
neoliberal maker, feminist/new materialist and posthuman theory becomes a tactical guide
for a more-than-human maker culture (Gareth Foote and Eva Verhoeven).

(Un)Learning Technology: Homo Faber's Tools

Contributors to this section highlight the potential of critical material engagements for learning
about, but also with, technology. In this respect, they recall Matt Ratto's reminder that learning
with and about technology should never merely be a means for priming (young) people for
successful careers. These artists, designers, practitioners, and thinkers provide elucidating
examples of projects across a variety of sectors in arts, design, and formal and informal
educational environments. They attempt to critically unmake and remake machine learning
algorithms (Caroline Sinders), discarded hard drives (KairUs), and electronic components
(David Cole  Hannah Perner-Wilson).

The role of tools in processes of learning by making can be seen as a point of interest
since constructionist models for learning were devised by Jean Piaget, Seymour Papert,
and others. Vilém Flusser grappled with the mutually in-form-ative relationships between
tools, makers, factories (or sites of production) and schools (or sites of learning), a set of
conditions that allowed the figure of homo faber to emerge. Twenty years down the line,
tools remain a point of interest, as authors assess what might constitute critical making in
the context of architectural training (Wim Nijenhuis), design education (Serena Cangiano),

and laundry practices (Samantha Penn). These contributions problematize not only the
tools but the larger sociocultural, ecological, geographical, and historical contexts they
are embedded within. Nor we should forget that language itself is a tool, and inquire as
to how the critical maker might challenge it (Verena Kuni). Can these discursive tools
be unmade to reveal new productive forces? Perhaps critical making is most adequately
defined as a simultaneously constructionist and diffractive process of learning: a tacit,
material, and conceptual transformation.

Organizing Openness: Sociality and Community

Since the  financial crisis, we have observed the rise of collaborative workspaces in
cities all over the world. Creative workers, freelancers, and designers have gathered in
coworking spaces, makerspaces, creative ateliers, and cultural hubs. The rise of such
shared workspaces implies a break from the traditional division of labour set out by fac-
tories and offices. The spatio-organizational format of these new spaces is a response to
the expansion of digital culture, where openness and sociality are considered require-
ments for any making practice. This culture is centered on open technology standards
that are, in theory, accessible to anyone. Such free and open ideals originate from
more established peer-to-peer practices within software development. The affordances
and demands associated with these ideals have catalyzed new forms of organization of
labour and production. For instance, in software production, the hierarchical and top-
down organizational characteristics of factory production have started to be replaced by
decentralized peer practices, as epitomized by the open source movement. Aspects of
sociality and community created by these practices become crucial ingredients in the
material production of objects and artifacts.

Given these shifts, some argue that what is missing in MAKE-style making is the role
of the collective and critical action beyond the practice of making itself. This requires
a critical look at how sociality might be appropriately contextualized, firmly situated in
local communities and histories. The organizational practices of the Enkel collective
provide one insightful illustration of how this might be carried out (Benjamin Matthews).
Some practices intervene in the face of institutions, using tactics to trace the blackboxed
physical and infrastructural components of Amazon Web services in Ireland (Paul O'Neil).
Others show how self-organized communities interrogate housing databases to enable
intervention and dissent in the context of urban regeneration in London (Tom Keene).

Contributors in this section address aspects of labour in relation to open design communi-
ties. They develop methods to destandardize design and challenge the prevalent concept
of the universal user (Deanna Herst). They rearticulate the work involved in maintaining
a sustainable open design commons (Peter Troxler). Of course, communities possess a
certain class, a particular politics, a specific gender makeup. The role of these spaces
of sociality in technical development, learning, and experimentation are discussed in the
context of academia (Krystin Gollihue  Abigail Browning), and in a f(r)ictional dialogue
between a hacker and a designer (Anja Groten).
                                                                                                  




Making Spaces: Labs, Institutions, and Autonomous Zones

Promoters of the Maker Movement designed a single vision and an overarching brand,
attempting to draw together the corporate with the highly radical and autonomous. This
global maker concept assumed that there is enough common ground between makers
across continents to claim this common name. It assumed that you can 'make almost
anything' with the same standardized set of tools. It assumed that internet accessibility
is the same everywhere. And it assumed that the same set of values are largely trans-
ferable and universal.

But making was never monolithic. Makers have organized themselves in very different
ways. Authors in this section shed light on the ways in which such implied universality is
problematic if left unquestioned. People in different locations, in different social positions,
and even within the same society hardly share the same privileges equally. This results in
different desires and ideas of success, as well as different demands for information and
survival in online and offline spaces.

Examples of how the needs and values of different communities in different contexts vary
widely is addressed in relation to sex work under SESTA-FOSTA (Grace van Ness), and as
strategies for resisting state surveillance of online communication in China (Kat Braybrooke).
Indeed, Chinese maker identity provides an access point for understanding the prob-
lems of discussing Global South making practices within a Western-centric discourse on
critical making. For example, the maker practice of Shanzai, the production of cheap
imitation goods, is deemed incompatible with the global digital economy, creating a
tension between older local practices and the influx of borrowed digital universalisms
and logics of the digital creative economy (Xin Gu  Pip Shea). In wealthy European and
Australasian countries on the other hand, community workshops are being instrumental-
ized for creating attractive alternatives in terms of sustainable and liveable post-growth
cities. Lastly, the domestication of maker-activists and counterculture community work-
shops and the negotiation of their ideals must be addressed in relation to local municipal
support and evaluation (Cindy Kohtala  Sharon Ede).

This closing topic leads into questions around critical making practices and institutional-
ization. The apparent newness of the idea of collaborative knowledge creation in labs is
countered by tracing its gendered and colonialist past. This lineage still informs how con-
temporary lab work is structured and valued in universities (Maya Livio  Lori Emerson),
for example. On a more general level, instituting, as the process of being institutionalized,
is discussed as an (im)possible arena for critical making practice (Bernhard Garnicnig).




Is writing about critical making like dancing about architecture?

Considerable effort has been made to include a variety of perspectives in this book. We are
pleased to be able to present contributions from design, arts, engineering, media, and theory
in all kinds of imaginable hybrids. Writings here come from people in academia, the creative
industries, education, and activist collectives – or all of the above. However, as editors we are
the first to admit that we have been decidedly less successful in including the voices from the
Global South. That said, various authors discuss practices that do not originate in the Global
North, and we encourage to follow such threads beyond the confines of this book. In different
ways, everyone involved considers reading and writing to be meaningful enough to devote
considerable energy to – to go through the time-consuming and emotional task of working
through feedback given by two young strangers who continually ask for more. Perhaps being
in such a position is related to having some kind of investment in the idea and potential of
critical making in the first place. Perhaps what we consider to be critical, what we call making,
is not even registered as such in other contexts, where communities have different methods
and tools to give meaningful direction to what they do and create. As Donna Haraway reminds
us: 'grammar is politics by other means'.

 Writing and making make an odd pair. With one hand, we formalize our societal reflections
 into the discursive power of words. With the other, we perform the concrete activity of mak-
 ing and creating. But without wanting to either underplay or overhype making, we believe
 there's enough to gain by reconnecting these two practices. We hope this collection of words
 can help articulate the criticality of making – forming the discursive in-between space that
 is so necessary for questioning making. We invite makers like ourselves – in classrooms,
 neighborhood communities, shared studios, tool shops, hackerspaces, and university labs
– to inhabit this space. While this volume is inherently limited, we hope its contributions will
 offer you new ways of connecting with people, new approaches to tools and activities, and
 new methods for pushing the boundaries of your own practice. We want to thank everyone
 involved for their openness, persistence, suggestions, and wonderful enthusiasm. We hope
 you enjoy what we have made together.

Critical making is increasingly being adopted to describe design-oriented practices and ped-
agogies that include both conceptual and technical work. Engaging with definitions and
articulations of critical making is important given its increasing circulation. Critical making has
found its way into workshops and papers, has been used as a theme for several academic
conferences, has become the title for a number of academic courses, and has served as a
banner for a number of academic initiatives, including as a visioning principle for the Rhode
Island School of Design. It is therefore worthwhile to step back and describe Ratto's original
intentions regarding the coining of this term and to articulate our ongoing research and ped-
agogical work to reincorporate both critical analysis and material making.

 The term critical making was initially used by Ratto in  to define a conjoined pedagog-
 ical and research practice that used material engagements with technologies to open up
 and extend critical social reflection. These early experiences coordinating critical making
 workshops proved a fruitful source to explore theories about the relations between society
 and technology drawn from fields such as Science and Technology Studies and Philosophy
 of Science. Most importantly, this work served to articulate the desire 'to theoretically and
 pragmatically connect two modes of engagement with the world that are often held separate
– critical thinking, typically understood as conceptually and linguistically based, and physical
"making", goal-based material work'.


colloquially, by the experiences of the authors. Importantly, the transformation of one's under-
standing regarding the relations between society and technology may involve an affectual
dimension that is often under addressed in both social and technical work: 'Ultimately, critical
making is about turning the relationship between technology and society from a "matter of
fact" into a "matter of concern". I [Ratto] see this as requiring personal investment, a "caring
for" that is not typically part of either technical or social scholarly education'.

The importance of integrative educational initiatives that work to bridge the humanities and
technology is highlighted by the adoption of acronyms such as 'STEAM' by directors of
mainstream educational initiatives. Here, the more traditional focus on Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math is supplemented with the term Art as a placeholder for the forms
of knowledge and pedagogies associated with aesthetic and humanities-based education.
Needless to say, it is no more possible to simply add in 'art' – whatever that term is expected
to encompass – to pedagogical practices in engineering or science disciplines, than it is to
simply add in 'engineering' or 'science' to art-based pedagogies. Some problems relate to
institutional divides and the problems inherent in navigating between various organizations.
Others relate to the variety of processes and results that are seen as valid forms of knowledge
by differing disciplinary groups. Creating interdisciplinary approaches and perspectives that
engage the epistemological differences between art and technology or science is not merely
an additive process, but requires substantial and novel pedagogical moves.

The 'Critical' in Critical Making

We believe that 'critical' is an essential attribute for such interdisciplinary practice, including
reflective thinking about the value propositions and epistemic boundaries and practices
within traditional disciplines. We also see criticality as including expansive thinking about the
site and social import of the objects and forms of knowledge that emerge from one's work.
Second, we believe that productive project-based 'making' is an important mode of produc-
tion for interdisciplinary work because it can operate as a non-disciplinary middle ground for
different communities and groups. The linking of personal investment, critical theory, and
material production is what marks critical making as a unique mode of engagement with
the world. The authors, each in their own way, have continued these developments, looking
to establish educational initiatives and curricula that work to develop critical makers with
appropriate skill sets and understandings that engender critical innovations and experiments
regarding the sociotechnical.

By 'critical', we tend to see this as following the interventionist and transformative theoretic
work associated with the Frankfurt School of Critical Theory. The scholars most associated
with the Frankfurt school included Herbert Marcuse, Theodor Adorno, and Max Horkheimer.
These scholars – and many others – shared a conception of a 'critical theory' understood as
adjacent from the dominant academic concept of 'theory' present in scientific work of that
time. Rather than focusing on generalizable descriptions of current conditions, critical theory



 was primarily concerned with understanding and constituting 'reasonable conditions of life'.
 According to Horkheimer, doing so required a rejection of such normative valuations of theory
 as 'better, useful, appropriate, productive, and valuable', due to the ways in which research
 associated with such valuations were both predicated by and worked to reinforce current
 social situations. Social transformation and an increase in 'human emancipation' required
 non-normative theory that strove to transform rather than describe. Here it is important to
 note the differences between 'critical' understood as merely reflexive and hermeneutic, and
'critical' as defined here and linked to the overt goal 'to liberate human beings from the cir-
 cumstances that enslave them'.

Certain academic disciplines such as political economy, philosophy, and cultural studies
have promoted 'criticality' as an intrinsic aspect of their work and have actively developed
pedagogical processes to help students adopt and practice critical approaches. However,
we do not believe that criticality is an intrinsic aspect of any specific academic discipline.
Instead, criticality can be understood as a present though often somewhat hidden aspect
of all disciplinary practice. This is revealed by technical disciplinary engagements that have
focused extensively on criticality as part of a technical practice.

Within the framework of technological design, criticality tends to first delete – or at least put
aside – current value propositions associated with technology. Three critical material-concep-
tual practices can be singled out as illustrative of specific attention to the variety of naturalized
values typically associated with technology and technological development. First, critical
design as described and practiced by Dunne and Raby addresses the dominant focus on
commercialization and for-profit interests within the world of design, using the design and
exhibition of objects to reveal these interests and provide alternatives. Their aim is to make
consumers more aware of the values, ideologies, and behavioral norms inscribed in the
designs that are used in their everyday lives.
