More-Than-Human Making

So far, we have described a highly constrained maker culture – one that does not extend
beyond the geographic regions of North America and Europe, one focused exclusively on
novel technologies and digital processes, and one that is solely the domain of makers cast
in a hobbyist or entrepreneur mold.

This myopic view of maker culture reduces the scope of possibilities and excludes many
cultural practices. Another, broader set of practices will be discussed here and read through
theories that consider a 'more-than-human' arrangement of 'material, technical, and intensive
objects and processes'. Posthuman and new materialist theories contest the assumption that
the ability to affect or be affected is the domain of organic matter only, suggesting instead that
the material world can be understood as an assemblage where 'nonhuman technologies and
natures are as much part of society as humans'. Proposed by Rosi Braidotti, critical post-
humanism is built on feminism and post-colonial theories and adds a level of accountability
and subjectivity to the discussion. Braidotti defines the 'critical posthuman subject within an
eco-philosophy of multiple belongings [...] as a subject that works across differences and is
also internally differentiated, but still grounded and accountable'.

This reading considers a framework for maker culture that explicitly recognizes the non-human
vitality within materiality, and also acknowledges practices that construct subjectivities not
bound to the concept of the individual, but as continuously forming. Continuously forming
subjectivities necessarily blur opposition and boundaries that can exclude and marginalize,
offering a complex, diverse, and more inclusive framework from which to act. The concept
of the posthuman enables us to rethink our power relationships and 'greatly expand our
understandings of the multiple agencies, dependencies, entanglements, and relations that
make up our world'. It makes it possible for us to consider our being in the world beyond
binary divisions of human versus non-human agency.

Affective Making

The maker movement is scaffolded on an array of advanced digital fabrication technologies
that have emerged from a culturally and geographically narrow area of the world. This par-
ticular flavor of maker culture is predicated on a primarily American narrative of software and
hardware industries and commercial success. According to this technological fable, innovative
firms create products that change the world for the better. However, in recent years this Silicon
Valley narrative has been challenged by a series of indiscretions and abuses of power. These
often reveal that these companies' primary motivations are high valuations and profit margins


     Publishing, .



along with the proliferation of a cyber-libertarian philosophy. Similar techno-deterministic
attitudes can be found embedded in maker culture, attitudes that exclude other practices
and cultures from around the world that do not fit this narrative.

One example is the widespread practice, derived from India, known as jugaad. The meaning
varies depending on context and usage, but can be described as a type of frugal innovation
or a 'hack'. In contrast to the maker movement predicated on particular digital technology
and access to specialist spaces, the practice of jugaad is commonplace and is performed as
a necessary response to obstacles that occur within everyday life.

 Contrasting jugaad with Western-style maker culture should not be understood merely as an
 opposition of making via emerging technologies versus making as 'frugal innovation' or with
'low-tech' means. Instead, examining jugaad-style making demonstrates an alternative situat-
 ed practice. Here, making is driven by environmental and economic conditions of necessity,
 rather than leisure or profit-driven innovation.

Jugaad describes a type of activity that often responds to problems with a creative solution,
fix, or workaround. In contrast to the Western model of making enshrined in curated making
spaces, with specialized tools and a single-minded intent, jugaad-style making practices
are experiments in augmenting, repairing, or improving domestic and community spaces
with informal methods of making-do using reappropriated or recycled materials. This type
of making is not facilitated in purpose-built workspaces, guided by prescribed methods, or
accomplished using standardized tools. Instead, jugaad-style making is about subverting
design thresholds, pushing against engineering principles, and exploiting opportunities within
the fabric of the environment or technical infrastructures.

These workarounds can also involve exploiting the non-physical substrate of consumer
products and networked technologies. Take, for instance, the simple but commonplace
practice of using 'missed calls' to avoid a connection charge. Here layers of network
hardware and protocols, subscriptions tariffs, and the mobile phone itself are augmented
by a nuanced grammar (or protocol) of 'beeping' patterns that have been predetermined
by phone users. This jugaad is an arrangement of existing technologies, a response to
economics conditions that creates 'differentials across capitalist innovation and subaltern
practices of everyday life'. It is the application of human ingenuity within a complex media
ecology. Ecology can be understood to refer to the media ecology of the mobile phone and
associated networked communication systems, but also to the jugaad ecologies as a whole
that 'affect a passing from stasis (obstacle, law, hurdle, blockage, problem) to improvi-
sation (passage, exit, trick, movement)'. To affect this change from one state to another
is not a capacity reserved only for human agents in this complex ecology. Conceiving of
organic or inorganic agents as holding latent potential to act on each other describes an


affective capacity. This is a useful way to frame jugaad and making practice more broadly,
including the way agency is distributed within human, material, and technical interactions.
Jugaad-style practices are often an exercise in exceeding the design of technical objects,
which is possible because these objects have a 'homeostatic autonomy that exists outside
of any one human's grasp'. These practices – which include overcoming the expected
conditions of use or restrictive access to technical assemblages such as mobile phones, for
example – are reminiscent of tactics that oppose or insert themselves into institutionalized
relations of power, tactics echoed in the Maker's Bill of Rights that state an opposition to
the institutionalized forces of production.

Vibrant Making

Another example of an alternative making practice is drawn from an observational research
study of an artist. Felix Larsen-Jensen uses a bricolage approach to analogue electronic
music production, creating tools and instruments from assemblages of recycled materi-
als, found objects, and electronic components. Larsen-Jensen is identified as part of a
maker culture and perhaps even self-identifies as a maker. However, the relationship to
his materials is driven by their animate qualities and their contingent properties within
a chaotic environment. Such an approach to making, materiality, and the environment
has more in common with jugaad than with a makerspace or FabLab in their common
Western-centric configurations.

This difference is proposed as part of a wider shift to a neo-animist ontology, a concept
 drawn from Jane Bennett's book Vibrant Matter. She asks the question 'what if materiality
 itself harbors creative vitality?' and critiques the conception of matter as subject only to
'mechanisms' or 'autonomisms' that treats the things of the world as inert and determined
 only by human-made forces. She argues that there is an energetic vitality inside all things
 that she calls 'thing-power'. This power or vibrancy, she explains, 'mean[s] the capacity of
 things – edibles, commodities, storms, metals – not only to impede or block the will and
 designs of humans, but also to act as quasi-agents or forces with trajectories, propensities,
 or tendencies of their own'.

In the research findings, the DIY practitioner demonstrates a codependent relationship with
his workshop environment, where the collision of parts, materials, and space are more
important for the creative emergence of difference-in-itself than an efficacious approach
to materiality where manipulation of materials, understanding of tools, and expected out-
comes are exclusive only to human agency. The practice and creative outcomes of the artist
are extremely entangled with the materials, which exhibit a latent capacity for affecting his
own agency and the outcomes of the work.




An interesting observation from this study is made at the local refuse center where the artist
salvages many of his materials. The discarded objects available in this space are arranged
not by their original use or function, but by their most abundant material quality. This
leads to unexpected adjacencies such as 'birdcages, deckchairs, and Zimmer frames'.

Separated from their original function, these decontextualized objects open their material
capacity and exceed the thresholds of their original design. An example of an assemblage
created by Larsen-Jensen is a discarded aluminum pie dish combined with – amongst
other components – a control potentiometer for modulating an oscillating sound output
within a given range. In Larsen-Jensen's 'pie dish oscillator', the potentiometer has
started to degrade, and the formerly discrete entity begins to have unexpected effects
on the output, 'varying from harsh metallic grinding sounds, to a sound similar to fluc-
tuating hissing steam, which sporadically and unpredictably resumes a pitched tone'.

Although the potentiometer may have degraded because it had been manually modified
by Larsen-Jensen, the multitudinous ways that the internal materials and components
pull and push against each other – degrading material properties, changing the flow of
electrons, and distorting the subsequent sound output – are all processes generated
outside of human agency. This brings to mind Bennett's discussion of encounters with
various objects, particularly her story of debris found in a storm drain and the energetic
vitality inside it. She recalls that: 'In this assemblage, objects appeared as things, that
is, as vivid entities not entirely reducible to the contexts in which (human) subjects set
them, never entirely exhausted by their semiotics'.

Outside of opportunities afforded to creative practice by a co-constitutive practice
between humans and non-humans, what are the benefits of introducing a vitality to
matter? Within Bennett's thesis for a political ecology of things, she suggests a motiva-
tion that lies within our 'human hubris' when we consider matter as 'dead or thoroughly
instrumentalized', which leads to a lack of attentiveness to our material and ecological
conditions. Bennett wishes to promote 'greener forms of human culture and more atten-
tive encounters between people-materialities and thing-materialities'.  Without doubt,
a wholesale change in attitudes toward the relationship between humans and the envi-
ronment is necessary at this critical moment, and the restructuring of material culture
can play a key role in this transformation. A making practice that considers the vitality
in material suggests a positive attentiveness to materiality, but what does an ontological
equality between humans and objects exclude? When everything has 'thing-power' we
should not ignore the fact that not all actants have the same legible effect.




Situated Making

The maker movement is a predominantly Western phenomenon: 'What is called "making"
in North America and Europe is frankly a luxurious pastime of wealthy people who rightly
recognize that their lives are less full because they are alienated from material culture, [yet]
all over what is called the Global South there are makers everywhere, only they are not called
makers. There are fab labs everywhere, only they are not called fab labs'.

Looking beyond a Western viewpoint, there are ample examples of practices that present
characteristics of the maker movement in their approaches to social and technological evo-
lution, challenging existing models of production, distribution, and consumption through the
democratization of tools and processes.
