
Second, critical technical practice focuses on the value propositions embedded in specific
technical disciplines and associated training, using engagements with critical literature from
the humanities and social sciences as a way to trouble and contextualize the instrumental log-
ics associated with computer science and engineering. Phil Agre's work is particularly mean-
ingful for the development of critical making since his overt goal is the bridging of disciplinary
mindsets that serves as a precondition to hybrid multi-disciplinary practices. Finally, Agre's
concepts of critical technical practice have been extended into the field of design for human
computer interaction under the term 'reflective design'. Whereas critical technical practice




focused on encouraging and supporting reflection and overcoming of disciplinary divides,
reflective design encourages the development of technical objects intended to encourage
reflection on the part of users. In doing so, reflective design practitioners aim to denaturalize
the passivity of the typical relations between technology consumers and producers.

What unites the above approaches is a focus on material-conceptual processes that bring
together reflexivity and intervention. For each of the practices above, the process of being
critical starts by denaturalizing standard assumptions, values, and norms in order to reflect
on the position and role of specific technologies within society. However, in addition, a spe-
cific goal of each is to tactically intervene and disrupt traditional models of technological
development by giving engineers, designers, and in some cases, the public, an opportunity
to break out of the cycle of overworking, overproducing, and overconsuming – to step back
and reflectively reconsider a broader spectrum of human experience and culture. If tech-
nology is to improve society, it must be critically reflective and designed for the complexities
of what it means to be human.

The 'Making' of Critical Making

As noted above, use of the term 'making' was initially intended to highlight the importance
of material production and participation as key to critical thinking and conceptualization
regarding technology. Equally, Hertz's position is that the term 'maker' is relevant to this
work because in some ways it stands at the intersection of traditional media arts practice,
product design, craft, and computer science research. Because of this, we find it useful as
a model for interdisciplinary pedagogy: it is a materially-based mode of tactile practice that
primarily sits outside of academic disciplines.

The term 'maker' took on a specific usage in  when Dale Dougherty founded Make maga-
zine, which he used as a term to rebrand and sanitize the term 'hacker' to be more acceptable
to the public, schools, and potential sponsors. The term maker can be seen as a move toward
craft-style practices and a distancing from the two definitions of what 'hacking' is: . breaking into
security systems for malicious or criminal purposes (i.e. cracking), or . the clever subversion
of making things work in unexpected ways (i.e. a clever hack). The concept of maker started
out by highlighting ordinary people making in their garages and backyards, but eventually also
enveloped work in the experimental media arts, open source hardware, and hackerspace culture.

Over the past fifteen years, the term 'making' has come to describe grassroots-oriented electronic
hobby projects and initiatives that blend clever physical construction, craft, microcontrollers,
robotics, and open source ideals based on the free sharing of information. As community-orga-
nized hackerspace studios, open source D printers, and DIY-style physical computing platforms
have become more widespread, the concept of making has also grown considerably.



However, the increasingly widespread adoption of the term 'maker' has not come without
some costs. While we find the term 'making' useful as a method for democratizing the fabrica-
tion of technological objects, we also see that with this larger social adoption, the adversarial,
political, and tactical components at the heart of many tech-oriented DIY practices have been
largely removed and replaced with a singular interest in technological skill or craft. In other
words, the popular concept of maker has unified an interest in a hands-on involvement in
technology development, but has done so by subtracting critical engagement from the pro-
cess. While some residual critical aspects remain, they have a milder resemblance to their
ancestors, including a belief in open source accessibility of technologies and a belief that the
tactile production of technological objects is important to human well-being.

Making has emerged as a powerful concept in unifying technological and social crafts, but
we believe that the field needs to be more self-reflective and critical if it is to progress. Critical
making raises questions such as: What are the relations between particular social agendas
and technical objects and systems? How might sociotechnical systems be integrated with
wider and more emancipatory values? What can we build to sustain and foster social equality
and justice? What technologies are worth making? The definition of critical making contains
the potential for its interdisciplinary mission: Making requires 'hard' skills of technology while
criticality requires conceptual thinking. We see technical exercises of making an LED blink
with an Arduino or D printing an object as fundamental first steps in education, but questions
about the design, purpose, and cultural value of created things are important next steps in
the process of making.

Critical Making in the Classroom

In this section we provide examples of our own research and teaching practices, demon-
strating our commitments to developing critical makers – transdisciplinary individuals with
the ability to link technical practices drawn from computer science and engineering-related
disciplines and conceptual understandings and theories drawn from arts, humanities, and
the social sciences.

Ratto's Teaching Experiences

I am an Associate Professor in the Faculty of Information, Bell University Labs Chair in
Human-Computer Interaction, and direct the Critical Making Lab  at the University of
Toronto. My work focuses on developing theories, practices, and pedagogies that increase
understanding and human agency regarding the complex relationships between information
technologies and society. For me, critical making is both a research object and the means
for studying that object.

An important outcome of my work on critical making is academic writing aimed at increasing
the uptake of material practices within traditionally language-based critical disciplines. The
results of this work are often typical academic objects – journal articles, book chapters, edited



collections, and monographs. I see this work as a necessary part of critical making given
the predilection of higher education for abstract and linguistic artifacts. But these works
are themselves built upon the traces of what I term 'critical making experiences', events
that I and my students curate, where material production and conceptual insights and
vocabularies are conjoined.

These events share the following characteristics: first, they are engendered by an ambiguity,
contradiction, or disjuncture at work within one or more conceptual theories; second, they
require participants to engage with the above conceptual uncertainties through a construction
process that is more or less materially constrained; and third, though objects are produced
through such processes, these objects are not the main outcome. Instead, the intended results
of these experiences are personal, sometimes idiosyncratic transformations in a participant's
understanding and investment regarding critical/conceptual issues. I have shared these expe-
riences with a range of individuals in a range of contexts including private companies, public
workshops, academic symposia and conferences, and, notably, within my own teaching. I have
been teaching a class in critical making in the Master's of Information program at the University
of Toronto since . The class includes master and PhD students from the aforementioned
program as well as students from engineering, architecture, and visual studies.

The critical making experiences that I have developed have addressed a variety of topics but
for the most part have focused on issues associated with the increasing movement of digi-
tally-influenced processes and value propositions into all aspects of the human social world.
Depending on the year and current issues in the media, we discuss recent decisions regarding
handgun legislation, developments around climate change, or issues about surveillance or
privacy. I give students the specific prompt: 'Build a moral technology'. They have one week
to design, build, and explain their project. In the following class, each group shows their
results, describes how and in what ways it is a moral technology, and provides an overview of
their process. These performances are followed by facilitated class discussions where issues,
ambiguities, and outcomes are debated and described. These experiences are therefore moti-
vated and supported by work from fields such as Science and Technology Studies and the
Digital Humanities that highlights concerns related to digitality and information more generally.
Scholars such as Donna Haraway, Leigh Star, Geoff Bowker, Bruno Latour, and many others
have examined some of the dimensions of what we might generically term 'technoscience'
and its emancipatory or constraining aspects.

Individual classes are organized as follows. Every class contains a conceptual exploration and
making section. In the first few weeks of the class, the making section mainly provides some
basic skilling around microcontrollers, electronics, and simple programming. Following the
introductory weeks, we move towards more specific conceptual material explorations organized
around a particular theme or question. Again, the class involves a set of specific readings
around morality and technology, accompanied by a particular design prompt. Students build
a response to the design prompt, show it, and discuss it with the rest of the class. Students
are then tasked with writing a reflection paper in which they describe the project, talk about
the process of building it, and link to course readings and readings from other contexts. The
course ends with a final open show, a public exhibition of the traces of critical making.
                                                                                               




The above pedagogical design has been remarkably successful in deepening student
engagement and understanding of critical theories and sociotechnical issues. This is
demonstrated in the sophistication of the written work done by students as well as the
conversations carried out in class. Equally, in many cases, the objects that have been
created have turned out to be quite evocative and interesting in their own right. However,
I encourage the students to remain focused on the process of creation rather than on
the results. Specifically, these objects are not typically exhibited or described outside
of the course context. I believe the most important results of critical making should be
critical makers – individuals with an enhanced ability to parse the complexity of our
sociotechnical world.

Hertz's Teaching Experiences

I work as Canada Research Chair in Design and Media Art at Emily Carr University,
where I regularly advise and teach graduate students. When initiating studio-based
design projects with my students, I often encourage them to start out with the following
methodology adapted from Sengers et al's process of reflective design:

     'desktop'. General assumptions of engineering include efficiency, reliability, convenience,
      and pervasive connectivity. Identifying metaphors can be the result of literature review,
      observation, or other research methods.
      embodied movement or position is marginalized. What disciplines, groups, or users are
      excluded by these metaphors?
      body, for example. What would the new thing look like and how would it work? What if
      we designed only for occluded things?
      accelerate this process. It is important to actually fabricate the thing because it has a
      tangible legibility, documents well, and has the potential to act as a meeting point or dis-
      ruptor between different users and communities. Built things are 'real' and constructively
      propose how a system is envisioned differently.
      data collection in the form of surveys, interviews, observations, or usability tests can be
      of substantial use in understanding the impact of the project, especially in measuring
      how it challenges and disrupts biases.


In addition to using this process of 'occluded' or 'inversive' design to help my graduate
students, I use it as a method for my own studio work. I generally emphasize the made
object more than Ratto does: I aim to build 'things to think with' that aim to be evoca-
tive things with their own form of agency. I see them operating somewhat like boundary
objects or boundary negotiating artifacts. These devices – functional prototypes that
are exhibited in public art galleries, documented online, and published as case studies
in academic papers – work to expose the hidden assumptions and values embedded in
technological systems. The purpose of these objects is to enable individuals to reflect
on the personal and social impact of new technologies, and to provide a provocative,
speculative, and rich vision of our technological future that avoids the clichés of con-
sumer or industrial design.

Unpacking Hidden Assumptions and Values

The pedagogical explorations described above differ in a number of important regards,
including the communities and disciplines in which the work is situated and, in a related
way, the role and purposes of the final made objects. Hertz uses a five step process to
build for occluded values, with the aim of building objects to provoke critical thought. Ratto
uses tools and practices drawn from the maker community to directly engage with critical
sociotechnical theory. However, both experiences share an emphasis on unpacking and
opening up the hidden assumptions and values associated with modern sociotechnical
life. Drawing upon work associated with domains such as critical design, critical technical
practice, and reflexive design (among others), the critical making pedagogies of the authors
make use of strategies familiar to art and design practice such as defamiliarization and
aestheticization, leverage resources from the humanities and social sciences such as her-
meneutic and metaphoric analysis, and engage with substantive tools and materials drawn
from engineering and natural science fields. Critical making as a pedagogical strategy thus
offers possibilities for truly engaged interdisciplinary work that directly confronts the difficult
epistemological issues encountered when bridging disciplines. Finally, we want to note
that the value of the term critical making is not that it replaces other descriptors of critical
hybrid conceptual/material practice, but instead that it works to connect the diversity of
tropes, themes, and disciplinary contexts from which such practices emerged. Refocusing
our attention as artists, scientists, engineers, and scholars on the development of critical
makers is an important step in the development of truly trans-disciplinary interventions
into the sociotechnical world.

    MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE   




 Teaching Critical
Technical Practice


   Graham Harwood

          TEACHING CRITICAL TECHNICAL PRACTICE
                                      GRAHAM HARWOOD

     The science which compels the inanimate limbs of the machinery, by their construction,
     to act purposefully, as an automaton, does not exist in the worker's consciousness, but
     rather acts upon him through the machine as an alien power.

     – Karl Marx

In  the French philosopher Gilbert Simondon published On the Mode of Technical
Objects to address just this form of cultural alienation implicit in the quote above. He writes,
among other things, about two ways in which people come to know technical objects. He says
when technology is viewed through the eyes of a child – which I imagine he is seeing as naive
and innocent – we gain an implicit, non-reflective, habitual tendency. A baby strapped into a
buggy is given a parent's mobile phone and is happily learning to play a game, but cannot yet
utter the words to express these interactions. Simondon then imagines the inverse: a trained
adult engineer, reflective and self-aware, who uses rational knowledge elaborated through
science. Today, this might be an Apple engineer, someone who creates closed technologies
and imagines that its users are still strapped in that buggy, unable to articulate their critical
needs. Simondon seeks out another form of relationship with technical objects, locating it in
the enlightened encyclopedism of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (from -
), in which concrete knowhow is abstracted and assembled into a technical orchestra.
Contemporarily, is it worth considering our networked technologies through this mode of
encyclopedism – an evolving off-grid, redneck, student, coder, geek pedagogy producing
technical information, hacks, how-to guides, shakedowns, and open source code repositories,
that respond to an evolving technical culture? This technical republic is nothing new. Its gene-
alogies can be traced back to the amateur experimentalists of the London Electrical Society
and William Sturgeon () – and beyond. At the heart of this artisanal formation was
a key concept: knowledge can be embedded in an object and its functioning is its explanation.

Is a tinkering internet a critical technical republic, a social space that potentially can break
down state actors with encryption, corporations by opening up software, and proprietary
technics by hacking them open, by making things public? Are the marginal technics in a
teenager's dirty bedroom, the dank basement of a bored salaryman, or the ham radio garden
shed strategies to unfold the clean room and its magic men in white coats? Or is this largely
a white male space that has eradicated other forms of objectivity and subjectivity from view?
How can we attempt to instantiate a devolved technics that refuses misogyny and racialization,
envisaging an alternative outside the paradigms of human slave or potential human enslaver?




     Rogove, Minneapolis: Univocal,  ().
                      MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                            




What follows is an to the methods used in Critical Technical Practice informed by
YoHa's (Graham Harwood, Matsuko Yokokoji) pedagogy, collaborations, and tinkering practice.
YoHa's work involves the use of art as a mode of enquiry into technical objects. Most recently
their investigations have been carried out within the fields of health, war, oceans, and death.
The space of YoHa's inquiry is usually populated by an interconnection of technical objects
and other kinds of bodies, as in a clinic, hospital, battlefield, or at sea. YoHa's focus of this
enquiry is where the flows of power can be reconfigured by the uncertain meaning, or inten-
tion of art – not necessarily to make art but to make use of its ambiguity within a wider enquiry.

Critical Technical Practice

Even though there are many genealogies of Critical Technical Practice, a good place to start
is Phil Agre's  essay Toward a Critical Technical Practice: Lessons Learned in Trying to
Reform AI. Here, Agre states that computers are not simply instrumental. Rather, the computer
helps structure the site of practice as part of its very design. He constructs a sense in which
computing can be seen as a form of imperialism, as 'it aims to reinvent virtually every other
site of practice in its own image'. Agre explores how his thinking was altered through learning
computer science and subsequently reading critical texts across disciplines. Agre goes on to
explain how he uses his intrapersonal experience to explore the role of criticality within the
field of AI while looking backward and forward in the field. Agre charts how his intrapersonal
space – his 'consciousness and purpose' changed – describing it as 'a slow, painful, institu-
tionally located, and historically specific process'.

From Agre's thought, a number of threads emerge: technologies are positioned as politically,
culturally, socially, and economically affective; the intrapersonal space of people involved in a
project is a legitimate site of enquiry; and each project is associated with an evolving pedagogy
situated in an evolving environment. The complexity of our interrelations with technical objects
preconditions the humility with which we approach a subject/object.

Ethics (or their lack) are interrelated with personal and professional risk, creating useful checks
and balances. Ethics become the context for what is made visible and what should remain
invisible to forms of power. For example, if you are working with a group of people investigating
how they get round/avoid/misinform certain formations of governance, it would be ethically
wrong to then go on to report this to management. Ethical conflict and risk – whether personal or
project-based – are important motors of engagement with technical objects, institutional, social,
or discursive critique. They help chart the historical conditions of the path the project has taken.

A related fork of Critical Technical Practice coincidentally aligns with many of these threads.
Initiated at the former Centre for Cultural Studies between  at Goldsmiths, Univer-
sity of London, it was a way to examine the live techno-social aspects of contemporary digital


culture. This stream of Critical Technical Practice (CTP) also incorporated art methods
in a relatively close alignment with threads pulled from Agre above. At its broadest, the
CTP taught at Goldsmiths can be summarized as the formation of thought and action that
incorporates art as a method of enquiry into particular sociotechnical milieu. This is a
compacted intellectual form, that makes the space between the technical, theory, prac-
tice, and the intrapersonal ambiguous. A typical class in CTP would make/explore things,
attempting to explain the phenomena caught in the lens of a project or a proposition,
ultimately reflecting on the process. The methods first arose in Cultural Studies from the
need to figure software as a technical, cultural, and interpersonal object.

A simple problematic could be:

In the Technical domain: if the exact same web browser runs on a series of machines
but has different software dependencies, operating systems, and the like, is it the same
software given that its functionality changes across different platforms?

In the Social/Cultural domain: if that series of machines happens to run in different enter-
prises, cultures, societies, political, and economic regimes, how can we think about the
ways software is affective in these different registers?

In the Intrapersonal domain: How has the browser affected memory, language, learning,
and sociality?

What boundaries/frames of possibility are created when software exists between the three
overlapping domains? The simple example above points to some of the complexity in
asking questions of technical ensembles.

In Critical Technical Practice we normally make no absolute distinction between the
domains of the technical, social/political, cultural, or intrapersonal. A live machine under
enquiry will be plugged into action, reaction, enablement and disablement with all of the
domains simultaneously. The domains themselves are arbitrary distinctions imposed or
imagined to make thinking easier or to express ourselves within forms of well established
thought and action. The domains are not a good fit – but they are all we have.

As an example of how such complexity can be addressed, we might propose that the class
create a simple Denial Of Service (DoS) attack on a remote test server by learning to code
computers for the first time. It is empowering for students to find out how quickly they can
code. The class would learn how to do this from T.J. Connor's book Violent Python. After
the group had reached a self-satisfied tingle of radicalism, the group would be asked to
look up the author and would find that Connor is a top grade US Military expert. The group
would then look at the book's distribution and market penetration and be encouraged to
question the affective logics, politics, and culture of the book. They would then reflect on


why the workshop had been constructed the way it was and how their own learning in
different registers of technicality, politics of information, personal critique, and empow-
erment was achieved. Critical Technical Practice, then, is not necessarily a reduction of
phenomena to literature or a system of logics, but can instead be thought of as knowledge
incorporated into a thing that the class created, looked at or pointed to, through revealing
a certain type of gaze.

Foucault describes the formative relationship between seeing in its widest sense and know-
ing in The Birth of the Clinic. He asserts that the 'bright, distant, open naivety of the gaze'
is transformed by the th century birth of discourses of empirical observation: a machine
that sees itself detached from its subject is able to make objective observations about
it and use the results to reason. This form of gaze is incorporated into many discourses,
from the technical and scientific to the historically artistic. The gaze, and how language
changes to interpret that gaze, is the means by which Foucault charts the Birth of the
Clinic. According to Foucault, we can think about the simple and naive act of looking as
having agency. This particular form of silent perception allows for the author of the gaze
(and in this case the class) to attentively listen to the observation. The observation then
requires expression through language and gesture in order for the observed to become
visible within culture and shared in society. This expression is usually transformed by the
class into a complex problematizing object or action.

A prerequisite of Critical Technical Practice is that it incorporates this form of gaze in
thinking through the formation of oneself as a thinker and actor in the world. Enquiring into
one's own pre-existence helps understand the structuring of potential that has informed
what one has become, what one could easily recognize, and what one could easily achieve.
As we have seen with Agre, this informs one's intrapersonal experience of a project. This
is not a summation of limit but an acknowledgement of the hard work needed to escape
a pre-existence, as it may relate to pillars of repression or suppression, class, gender,
sexuality, and race. The situated knowledge of family and friends, their relation to making
things, to popular culture, to oral histories, to struggles with money or law, reading, writing
and speaking – all these factors inform this process.

To this end, CTP is partially related to a schizoanalysis of Foucault's question: 'What are
we today?'. The class is always encouraged to unfold this question: Which conditions con-
strain, control, resist, govern, and determine this moment and not another? What patterns
of recognition are we privileging and why does it blind us to others? How does language
restrict us at the very moment we are able to say something? How can this engagement
be born anew at every instance of examination?


Media at the Margins

'[N]either mass media nor social media exhaust the ambit of media, any more than historically
 specific technologies and practices give us the standard by which to define and hence to under-
 stand processes and practices of mediation'.

As a second clarifying example of pedagogy and CTP, we can appropriate Matthew Fuller and
Andy Goffey's book Evil Media for use in class. The term 'grey media' coined in the book has
become a placeholder for forms of machines that alter the conduct/governance of those indi-
viduals – both technical and biological – that are part of their structural operations. This can be
thought of as those parts that make up a Simondon-type technical ensemble, where individuals
interrelate to form an emergent technical collaboration with human agency.

Students in this class are encouraged to find an evil/grey media object and present to the class,
concentrating on how its materiality is part of the world in which it also participates. This could
be anything from a Post-it Note, to an antidepressant drug, the corner of a shipping container, a
software object, or any other form or media object that is not usually given critical scrutiny. One
grey media machine that illustrates the theme of the work would be Form Validation Rules, here
commented on by Felix Drăgan, a former student at Goldsmiths.

     Validation rules are syntactic and semantic criteria applied to the data in form ﬁelds.
     These rules are used to police data input, to ensure its uniformity and compliance with
     underlying database formats and constraints. In the case of electronic forms, the auto-
     mated validation subroutines are also designed as a defense mechanism against acciden-
     tal or malicious user action. These circumventions or failures in code execution have
     the potential of revealing otherwise hidden attributes of encoded data with its relational
     structure, embedded assertions, or judgements.

Another example is the Pedestrian Barrier authored by the artist Simon Pope on a Pedestrian
Barrier produced by the company Qingdao Yongchang Suye Co., Ltd.

     The Pedestrian Barrier, like other portable security fences, is used for general crowd
     control and demarcation and can be ﬁnished in several ways: painted and hot dipped,
     galvanized, or hot galvanized only. It has a ﬁxed leg that can be delivered to site and
     assembled without any additional fastenings, and arguably typiﬁes the 'solid mid-sized
     objects' that philosopher Ray Brassier sees as deﬁned by our common sense under-
     standing of the world. Once deployed, it produces both isolation and kinship in other
     objects, depending on which side of the barrier those objects lie. Its manufacturers also
     provide an OEM service.

              MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                      



Science has always gone hand in hand with Enlightenment ideas, including critique. However,
the notion of law, especially the natural law, was also pivotal. Much of the work of critique was
around releasing reason from the bounds of its laws, not only the natural ones but also the


XX Lucy




Microbiological growth over a book and an integrated digital fungus that consumes Internet
texts share information across the network and tweet the text that both ‘organisms’ redact, .



On Dec , , at : PM, xtine burrough wrote:


December is a time of lists: lists my kids make, lists organizing the semester, grading, letters
of recommendation, final meetings, babysitter calendars so we can attend graduations and
parties... So, another list:

.   I feel uncomfortable talking about my creative practice as critical making or research. What
     is it that we are doing? Are we researching through our practice? Are we 'just' practicing?



     I wonder if critical making is art (or do critical makers consider themselves artists?) and if art
     can be critical making? Is one a subset of the other? Garnet Hertz operates as a researcher
     and artist from an artistic/interventionist position. I read his work and I think, yes, I could
     be classified like this. But going back to its beginnings, Matt Ratto's description of critical
     making takes a more formal and research-driven approach with a clear boundary that runs
     up against making works for audiences or exhibition. So then I think: no, this is not what
     I am doing. I ask these questions because it is so common for us to have a crisis of name/
     identity, a crisis I remediate in projects such as An Archive of Unnamed Women (     and The Women of El Toro (.   You asked about making art with technology now: I read philosopher Katherine Hayles’
     call to ‘put back into the picture the flesh that continues to be erased in contemporary
     discussion about cybernetic subjects’ as one that demands action. Much of the work
     we have made during the past fifteen years calls into question the role of the body in a
     networked community. Our work translates the possible realities and interconnections
     among the digital/virtual/living form.
.   Each time I write ‘posthuman’ my Mail application changes it to ‘postman’. This fosters
     a terrifically funny riff. The postman has become posthuman/is not delivering you this
     letter/the posthuman mail agent always rings twice. To make digital art, as pioneering
     feminists in the Capitalocene, is to enliven our subjectivity, to include in our work the
     ways forward for viewers, participants, onlookers, and naysayers to be richly entangled
     in the virtual and the physical: to be present and to present the digital as part of the
     patterning in communication with physical systems and ways of being.
.   My shopping list: Hatchimals and Morfboards; yours: pink dolls with pink accessories
     and spaghetti bikes. We can do this, momma.

Big love,

x




     Garnet Hertz, Conversations in Critical Making, Blueshift Series, Theorizing c, CTheory: . https://
     journals.uvic.ca/index.php/ctheory/article/view//.
     didn't hit the charts as fiercely. The CD is named after the film about a gardener whose simplicity is
     interpreted as genius. Wilco captures the contradictions of being here (physically) and there (mentally)
     sonically and with lyrics like, 'When you're back in your old neighborhood; The cigarettes taste so
     good; But you're so misunderstood [...]'.
                     MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                   




                  An Archive of Unnamed Women, online project and prints for exhi-
         bition and workshop, -ongoing.




media application to insert oral history audio recordings of women who lived on the El Toro
air base in Orange Country, California before it became a public park, .

On Dec , , at : AM, Lucy HG Solomon wrote:

x!

 As artists, it is strange how the past punctuates our present and emerges in later utterances
 and in different manifestations. I first knew philosopher Vilém Flusser through his and zoosys-
 temician Louis Bec's creatures, which influenced LOIS at our inception in . Though
 Cesar  Lois formed more than a decade after LOIS, Flusser was also part of that. Cesar Baio's
 scholarship centers around Flusser's theory of technology – an apparatus that is indicative
 and predictive of societal outcomes. As a result, our collective's reshaping of technologies
– the merging of microbiological and digital logic systems ( of reshaping society. i.e. What if our computers think like nature? And what if our computer
 connections are integrated with nature's conduits?

As a media – in between – artist, the connections are crucial. Work that crosses biology
with technology begins to shift what the medium itself can be, pushing us past interac-
tivity and towards a more existential pondering of how we connect and how the forms of
those connections pose new possibilities – for thinking, acting and being.

I also think about what it means to be a digital artist and posthuman (which yes, mine
also auto-corrects to postman!), and I lean towards the nature-based, non-anthropo-
centric drive to become less human or to unbecome human. Like Hayles, philosopher
and posthuman theorist Donna Haraway articulates cyberfeminism, and she advances
nonhuman priorities and processes. In her Chthulucene, humanity is no solitary figure
in the planet's history but is one among 'assemblages of organic species'. She is one
of many working to deconstruct the human/nature binary; world systems theorist Jason
W. Moore does so when he defines Capitalism as 'a way of organizing nature'. In the
different hybrid experiments by Cesar  Lois, where a technology's logic system is
based on microbiological growth, we are reacting against this self-imposed binary and
critiquing the recoding of nature.

That Chthulu/Anthro/Capitalocene of the present epoch is one that I see your work as
both defined by and defining, especially in the connection between the exploitation of
workers and the global economic system in which we partake. What is fascinating to me
is that it is no longer possible to use technology as a critical medium and not interact with
and comment on those systems of exploitation – of nature and of people(s). Your last






note, about the lists of things that our kids want, is tied to this system. The consumerism
that we participate in is so different from the past, when objects held value, were made
and traced to a source. The family tree of things is my personal project, which elevates
items that have crossed me that can be traced back generations, even in one instance
a bed frame originated in a tree felled by my great-grandfather.

But not anymore, not so much. Looking for that pink doll with more pink shit.

!

LHGS




tures is trained on the growth of the living organism Physarum polycephalum, .

On Dec , , at : PM, xtine burrough wrote:

Hi Lucy!

This notion of intervening in the medium, maybe even in Flusser's 'apparatus', to me, is
just another way to follow David Byrne and Jonathan Demme's creed to 'Stop Making
Sense'. I am inspired every time I sing along to:

I got a girlfriend with bows in her hair And nothing is better than that (is it?)



Byrne's gesture towards bows, it is serious! What does it mean to wear bows in your hair?
What kind of a girlfriend would you be if you resisted bows or scrunchies or long hair or
bangs? How do you make sense of this apparatus?! I riff between theory and practice,
between the text on my bookshelves and popular song lyrics. Christine Harold writes
about culture jamming as a form of musical riffing. 'Jamming' with art and culture,
between the art historical, the philosophical, and popular culture – from Flusser to Harold
to Byrne – offers us a method for riffing ourselves right into a series of punctuations.

The world needs more opportunities to stop making sense in all the same ways. The
rebellious, anti-logical spirit of the Situationists echoes through anti-pop songs. From
David Byrne's wisdom in the s to David Lowery's in the s – both would have
made Guy Debord proud. I've always interpreted this part of Lowery's song as a sugges-
tion to keep riffing. His 'lalas' are voice-centric, yours and mine take material form:

What the world needs now Are some true words of wisdom Like la la la la la la la la-la

xx



Haraway, Donna. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, .




Haraway, Donna. 'Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin'. Environ-
Harold, Christine. 'Pranking Rhetoric "Culture Jamming" as Media Activism', in Marilyn DeLure and
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and
Informatics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, .
Hertz, Garnet. Conversations in Critical Making, Blueshift Series, Theorizing c, CTheory, ,
https://journals.uvic.ca/index.php/ctheory/article/view//.
Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens: a Study of the Play-Element in Culture, London: Routledge 
Kegan Paul, .
Janse van Vauren, Lukas. Play as a Creative Factor in the Visual Arts: A Hermeneutical Reflection.
LOIS. imaginaryscience.org.
LOIS. Acornicopia, , http://imaginaryscience.org/project/acornicopia.
Moore, Jason W. Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital, London:
Verso, .
Ratto, Matt. 'Critical Making: Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life', The
Talking Heads. 'Girlfriend is Better', Speaking in Tongues, .
Stop Making Sense. (dir. Jonathan Demme, ).
Wilco. 'Misunderstood', Being There, .

      Tactics for a
     More-Than-Human
      Maker Culture

       Gareth Foote 
        Eva Verhoeven
                       MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                            




    TACTICS FOR A MORE-THAN-HUMAN MAKER CULTURE
                          GARETH FOOTE AND EVA VERHOEVEN

Maker culture promised to challenge models of production, consumption, and dissemina-
tion by democratizing the tools and spaces of production, as well as sharing knowledge.
But ever since its inception, maker culture has existed within an anthropocentric paradigm.
Our current environmental, political, and social circumstances require us to fundamentally
rethink our approach to making. Making is not a neutral act, but one with environmental,
political, and social consequences.

How can practitioners respond to this? What tactics can we apply to challenge the current
state of things? We challenge the notion of the 'maker' that has been asserted in predomi-
nantly Western culture – a figure constructed from a supposed evolution in digital techno-
logical capacity and a subsequent liberation of human potential for creativity and innovation.

The Maker 'movement' claims to promote meaningful change, challenging asymmetric
power structures and granting consumers a new potential to short-circuit the traditional
production cycle. We address these claims by using examples of making practice that
predate or contradict this conception of maker culture. In drawing on these practices,
we call into question the model of a maker, one driven by neoliberal concerns of market
innovation and disruptive technologically-enabled entrepreneurship. While promoted and
exported as an essential model, the maker who controls their material with novel techno-
logical tools is a very particular one.

As a counterpoint to this, we use new materialist and posthuman theories to reposition
the maker amongst their materials, tools, and environment. Entangled within this milieu,
the maker becomes an equal creative partner, addressing the complexity and vitality of
assembled matter and the interrelations between the organic and the inorganic, between
the human and the nonhuman. This response is a reaction to the limiting humanist frame-
work that has failed to critically address the pervasive influences of late capitalism and its
disastrous ecological consequences.

To this end, we explore examples of making practices that work tactically rather than
strategically. Tactics, as defined by Michel de Certeau, are distinct from strategies. For
Certeau, a strategy is best described by considering the totality of a particular set of force
relations that can be seen as distinctive from an exterior set of force relations: 'the cal-
culus of force-relationships which becomes possible when a subject of will and power (a
proprietor, an enterprise, a city, a scientific institution) can be isolated from an "environ-
ment"'. [It can] 'serve as the basis for generating relations with an exterior distinct from
it (competitors, adversaries, "clienteles," "targets", or objects of research)'.  Strategies
are articulations of power that take the shape of institutions, which in turn determine the
actions of the people that inhabit them.



Tactics, on the other hand, are not a totality and cannot be defined through locative force rela-
tions. Neither can a tactic define itself against the totality of the other: 'A tactic insinuates itself
into the other's place, fragmentarily, without taking it over in its entirety'. Tactics turn events into
opportunities. As Certeau stresses: 'The weak must continually turn to their own ends forces
alien to them'. If events emerge from strategies, tactics are the means used by people to turn
those events towards their own needs. Tactics are more fleeting, and exist outside of ownership,
making them more inclusive.

A Maker Culture

Maker culture has its roots in DIY and open source approaches to cultural production, ideals
of individual empowerment, and a focus on reproducing community and social relations. The
success of this particular maker culture is associated with the rise of makerspaces and FabLabs.
These often not-for-profit or community-run spaces would include a selection of machinery such
as D printers, laser cutters, and CNC mills/routers alongside traditional machine and hand tools,
and possibly include other making facilities for textiles, electronics, or food. Increasingly these
spaces are found in libraries, schools, universities, and research centers, where they have had
to adapt to the more hierarchical organizational structures of the host institutions. Contingent
on the location and organizational structures of their hosts, these hosted spaces have tended to
orient themselves towards openness and fair access through subsidies and outreach programs.
However, this has had only marginal success. Such spaces fail to extensively appeal to or reach a
diverse user base, instead attracting mostly those who are white, male, and have financial means.

During the last two decades in North America and Europe, makerspaces, maker publications
and the subsequent claims of technologically-driven progress have surged and been given the
status of a 'Maker Movement'. The term 'movement' implies a social movement as much as a
technological evolution – and according to some advocates and enthusiasts of European and
North American maker culture, that is precisely what it is.

 This movement found a voice through the popular 'Make' publication and Maker Faires. The
 proliferation of the magazine and Maker Faires (part of the Maker Media business) around the
 world is a story of success measured in terms of brand and marketing reach. The magazine is
 affiliated with O'Reilly Media and headed by CEO Dale Dougherty, a figure who is credited with
 popularizing the maker movement in the US and who was recognized by the White House as a
'Champion of Change' in . The language used by high profile figures such as Dougherty
 and Chris Anderson, author of The New Industrial Revolution, re-enforce ideas that the maker
 movement will lead to self-actualization, allowing individuals to realize their creative potential
 and become autonomous economic subjects. This rhetoric, together with the extensive reach
 of these individuals and businesses, supports a techno-myth that, amongst other claims,
 suggests that 'through the democratization of digital tools, "making" has become a universal
 element of human identity'.





 In  'Make' magazine published a Maker's Bill of Rights that positions itself against the
 interests of the corporate consumer industry. It impresses upon makers the responsibili-
 ties and opportunities to create consumer goods that counter proprietary practices such as
 planned obsolescence and restrictive warranty conditions, practices that encourage short
 lifespans and prevent repair and customization. Such proprietary practices are made mate-
 rial through software (forced updates outrunning the performant capacity of the hardware),
 hardware (glueing components, causing them to break when pried apart and proprietary
'pentalobe' screws, which cannot be removed) and legislation (copyrighting schematics and
 manuals). The Bill of Rights suggests ways of making that are antagonistic to these cor-
 porate mass production approaches and advocates changes that empower producers and
 consumers. These rights align with those of the free software movement, who advocate the
 basic freedom to study, change, and redistribute any software. Although it was not universally
 successful, the free software movement did instigate a significant proliferation of making
 practices in software development that contradicted the proprietary and predatory practices
 of corporate software companies. In contrast, it is difficult to identify the same success within
 the maker movement.

The technological evolution that has supported the maker movement has reinvigorated craft
practices and expanded the productive capacity of small scale businesses and institutions.
However, there has been limited meaningful change to corporate mass production. Neither
has there been a significant expansion of access to making facilities (excluding existing
practitioners and those with the available financial and cultural capital). This lack of signifi-
cant social change contrasts sharply with the celebrated success of maker spaces such as
Highway  in San Francisco, which is proclaimed to be: 'One of the most ambitious of those
collaborative spaces'. Highway  may be a successful space in terms of a business incubator
and accelerator. However, its success is measured not in terms of progressive social change,
but primarily in terms of capital investment and stock value. This type of space – in both
its associated maker culture and the model of maker it maintains – are the product of an
American neoliberalism and a techno-determinism that places a false sense of power into
the capacity of technology to make positive social change.

Maker culture promised to bring about shared knowledge, rethink our relationship to con-
sumption, and challenge the power relations inherent in the production of consumer goods.
But in its pursuit of promoting itself as a culture, it forgot to reflect on the institution it was
establishing. In its aim to become a valued element of contemporary culture, it unwittingly
reinforced a set of hegemonic power relations. These relations, in turn, maintain contemporary
cultural, political, and environmental practices that are unsustainable and unequal.


     Western Information Technologies, from Open Source to the Maker Movement', Digital Culture
     and Society  () (): -.


Ushahidi, which translates as 'testimony' in Swahili, is one such example. Ushahidi is a non-
for-profit technology company that uses crowdsourcing to collect data and map responses in
situations of crisis such as human rights reporting. It gives voice to otherwise marginalized
people and decentralizes media reporting. It was developed to map reports of violence in Ken-
ya after the post-election violence in . Ushahidi aggregates data from key social media
Assembling this data allows the company to generate useful, timely information in territories
where state actors may struggle to intervene. It combines citizen journalism with geospatial
information to empower communities.

This kind of platform can have significant social impact, making communities more resilient
and supporting social institutions struggling for funding in areas facing economic and environ-
mental stress. The social impact of supporting free and fair elections cannot be underestimat-
ed, and this is why the UN dedicates significant resources to these efforts. By crowdsourcing
data collection, Ushahidi provides a platform for decentralized media reporting and facilitates
collaborative content production. In doing so it provides a key example of a locative and situat-
ed practice – a practice applied in the very community where it was conceived and developed.

These examples push against the notion that, by setting up fab labs and makerspaces and by
providing communities with CNC machines and D printers, the world would become a better
place. The first ever cover story by 'Make' magazine in Volume  was dedicated to Kite Aerial
Photography (KAP). Along with a detailed account of how to build your own KAP Kit, the story
included a first-hand account of using it, and featured accompanying photographs of coastlines,
children's playground structures, and restored World War  supply vessels. No mention is given
to the different sites photographed, nor the juxtaposition of such different sites in a magazine – let
alone issues of privacy and surveillance. Here, making is framed as an individualistic pastime,
an aesthetic experience for the sake of it, rather than something that is necessarily situated and
that must therefore confront the wider consequences of its own making.





A similar approach as Ushahidi is used in the project Grassroots Mapping by the Public
Laboratory for Open Technology and Science (PLOTS), a project emerging from the context
of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Concerned residents, scientists, and members of PLOTS
worked together to collect images of the coastline before, during, and after the spill. The
information gathered provided residents with the tools to discuss restoration and recovery.
The project was so successful that international development NGOs like UNICEF and the
World Bank have reached out to PLOTS to use this method of participatory mapmaking in
other regions of the world. Here, successful technology is packaged up, ready for plug-and-
play use anywhere and everywhere.

But in an article on their work so far, PLOTS members discuss the urgency for situated
learning and challenging black box technology. They voice a critique of a misunderstanding
about their work as exclusively technology-driven and one that fits neatly within technological
determinism: 'organizations conceptualize Grassroots Mapping as primarily a set of tech-
nical practices and technologies [...] that can be passed from experts to trainees without
providing time for the development of shared norms or cultural meanings around the tools'.
The founders stress that any repetition of the project requires challenging the black boxing
of technology. This requires situating the project in the context it is meant to be applied in,
enabling communities to become active participants in the project. PLOTS argue that this
happens through situated learning, a learning theory developed by Jean Lave and Etienne
Wenger, which stipulates that learning is practical and situated in the context it takes place
in. Situated knowledge is embodied. Indeed, Haraway asserts that her essay on Situated
Knowledges 'is an argument for situated and embodied knowledges and an argument against
various forms of unlocatable, and so irresponsible, knowledge claims'.

Ushahidi and Grassroots Mapping are important examples of projects that emerge from
specific social contexts, primarily contexts of shared need for safety and security in times of
crisis. These systems can also set precedents and norms for forms of interaction, responsibility,
and social consciousness once the crisis has passed. Here we see examples of how these
home-grown systems are able to work with the norms and regulations of the places in which
they're developed to great success. These projects have grown and exist only in the context
that they are applied in, and are responses to actual crisis. They present a small part of the
heterogeneous array of projects that might be identified as characteristically maker movement
type projects in the widest sense, but without existing in the homogenous top-down framework
of the maker movement. That is not to say that learning from these projects is not transferable,
but only if it is developed by situating the project properly in its new context.





Embodied Making

Much of maker culture is founded on understandings of the human as a discrete, individ-
ual subject, which neatly translates into a neoliberal framework that requires us to dream,
imagine, and make individually rather than collectively. The bodies of individual subjects
fit into neoliberal economic models, in which the individual as consumer might have the
power to choose, but not the power to resist or counter collectively. Because of the com-
plex sociotechnical systems we are entangled in and the planetary challenges we face, this
approach is insufficient. Our entanglements and 'new relations to the natural world and to
sociotechnical systems are calling these previous understandings into question'.

Maker culture is more often than not anthropocentric. While there are an increasing num-
ber of examples that challenge such human centrism, these are not often found within the
field of maker culture. The British designer Thomas Thwaites explored different bodies and
embodiment in his project Goat Man: How I took a Holiday from Being Human for which
he aimed to become other, in this case a goat. The project developed from questioning our
observer position and attempted to challenge the idea that we can never truly change the
position from which we experience the world. The artist envies the ability of animals to live
in the moment, without constructing narratives of pasts and futures, a trait he defines as
specifically human. Thwaites investigated becoming a goat by consulting a shaman, neu-
roscientists, animal behaviorists specializing in goat behavior, prosthetists, microbiologists
specializing in the microbiology of the rumen (the largest of the four stomachs of a goat),
and a goat herder in the Alps.

Putting these perspectives together, Thwaites then used technologies to emulate the bodies
of goats. The artist went through a lengthy process of making through trial and error, working
with specialists along the way. He made several iterations of exoskeletons, and then, with the
help of prosthetists, he developed an exoskeleton that enabled him to become a quadruped.
He developed a prosthetic rumen in order to be able to digest a diet of grass. And he spent
three days with a herd of goats in the Alps, trying to live in the moment and become a goat.
One of his findings, documented in his book, is that the project enabled him to think of
the entanglement and complex networks that we inhabit: 'Being an animal would help us
remember that there is no manifest destiny to the human species – we are just among all
these other creatures'.

The challenges we face require a more pluralistic approach to embodiment and the bodies
we include in general. Maker culture needs to take account of this plurality and involve
bodies, systems, networks, and corporeal processes, but also an understanding of a great
diversity of bodies. The power of making needs to come from an inbuilt plurality in which we






enter into conversation with nature as an active agent. There is 'an argument for the pleasure
in the confusion of boundaries and responsibility in their construction', which also applies
to maker culture. The tactics of embodied and situated making, counter to the strategic
approach of maker culture, challenge and destabilize anthropocentric epistemologies –
and making plays an active part in this process.

Towards More-than-Making

The rhetoric of the maker movement speaks of transformational change to individuals,
society, and culture. While this vision is dangerously appealing on a surface level, it is
mostly presented from a culturally homogenous and narrow political vantage point. It does
not make clear who will be excluded in this bright future, only that it is brought about by
technology and innovation-driven progress with anthropocentric concerns at its core. This
blinkered vision has resulted in a monoculture colonizing the idea of making and ignoring
other histories, cultures, and practices – a myopic approach that overlooks any alternatives.

We have presented a number of examples of different maker practices, which are intended
to actively question the possibility of forms, places, and people. Their maker credentials
are not defined by their ability to master machines and manipulate materials, but are
instead a product of their social and material conditions. These practices also start from
a position of productive uncertainty, situatedness, and relationality to surroundings and
materials. The prominent maker movement rhetoric about transformational change has
not proved to foster equitable systems of mass industrial production, nor create local and
socially integrated hubs with evenly distributed access. In fact, the message of individual
empowerment is closest to the truth – but that individual is most commonly a neoliberal
figure whose success is not judged on positive impact to the social or environmental fabric.

 In this institutionalized form, maker culture has become strategic rather than tactical
– shaping the actions of members within, and identifying itself against those without.
 Against such exclusivity, each of the alternative examples presented here frame mak-
 ing as a tactic, enabling different people to participate, purposefully situating making
 in specific contexts, and opening up making to practices that go beyond domination
 of the physical environment. Grassroots and strategic making is broadened to include
 practices that are about the incidental entanglement of materials, environments, people,
 and ideas. These practices are then broadened to include, for instance, community
 making, social movement making, homemaking, and unmaking. Such making is about
 creating collective subjectivities that are constructed in a process with our surrounding
 non-human and human counterparts.

Are we best served by conceiving of making as a singularly anthropocentric concern?
What does our recent history of maker culture and contemporary conditions (social,
economic, environmental) tell us about putting more things into the world based on the



drives of human agency? Within our examples, more-than-human agency is an accepted
or imposed condition that is not always desirable, but that always has potential. More-
than-human agency challenges and complicates our relationship with the material world,
encouraging a less hubristic, more attentive approach to making, and a more substantive
politics of material culture.

ipatory map-making process centered on discourse', Journal of Aesthetics and Protest, Issue . Also
available from: https://www.joaap.org/issue/GrassrootsMapping.htm.
Fallows, James. 'Why the Maker Movement Matters: Part , The Tools Revolution', The Atlantic, 
June , https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive///why-the-maker-movement-matters-
part--the-tools-revolution//.
Forlano, Laura. 'Posthumanism and Design', She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and
Haraway, Donna. A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twenti-
eth Century, http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/source-text//.
Haraway, Donna. 'Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial
papers.org/archive/HARSKT.pdf.
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Nature's Danger-
ous Decline 'Unprecedented'; Species Extinction Rates 'Accelerating', . Available from: https://
www.ipbes.net/news/Media-Release-Global-Assessment.
Maker Media. The Maker's Bill of Rights, Makezine (). Available from: https://makezine.
com////the-makers-bill-of-rights/.
                        MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                            




Michael, Mike. Actor-Network Theory: Trials, Trails and Translations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publishing, .
Obama White House Archive. Champions of Change, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/champi-
ons/make-it-in-america/dale-dougherty.
Rai, Amit. 'The Affect of Jugaad: Frugal Innovation and Postcolonial Practice in India's Mobile Phone
Snake-Beings, Emit. 'Maker Culture and DiY technologies: Re-functioning as a Techno-Animist
Schwartz, Oscar. 'Sidestepping Apple: the third-party tinkerers fighting for your right to repair', The
Guardian,  May , https://www.theguardian.com/technology//may//sidestepping-apple-
the-third-party-tinkerers-fighting-for-your-right-to-repair.
Thwaites, Thomas. Goat Man: How I took a Holiday from Being Human. Princeton: Princeton
Architectural Press, .

 Making Critical
Ethical Software

     Caroline Sinders
                            (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                                




              MAKING CRITICAL ETHICAL SOFTWARE
                                      CAROLINE SINDERS

Machine learning is a large and important part of product design. It's embedded in
most of the everyday things that users touch, from Google search results to internet
ads and Netflix recommendations. Machine learning algorithms have also been used
in biased and unjust prison sentencing, in facial detection (or lack thereof), in biased
hiring practices that favor male applicants in technical roles, and in other ways that
harm everyday people in everyday ways. Technology can amplify harm, bias, misogyny,
racism, and white supremacy. Even if technology cannot create equality, technology as
a whole needs to be examined and remade in order to create some equitable spaces.

What would it look like to create technology – an equitable technology of harm reduction
and active critique – as an artistic as well as a technical intervention? Where are the
intersections of machine learning with tech and with art? Tania Bruguera's concept of
Arte Útil, or 'Useful Art', explores this notion of usefulness, of utilitarianism, in order to
create an intervention that is both an artwork and a tool.

     Useful Art is a way of working with aesthetic experiences that focus on the im-
     plementation of art in society where art's function is no longer to be a space for
    'signaling' problems, but the place from which to create the proposal and imple-
     mentation of possible solutions. We should go back to the times when art was not
     something to look at in awe, but something to generate from. If it is political art, it
     deals with the consequences; if it deals with the consequences, I think it has to
     be useful art.

Feminist Data Set started in  as a response, from an art and critical design space,
to the many documented cases of problems in technology as well as bias in machine
learning. It is a critical research and art project that examines bias in machine learning
through data collection, data training, neural networks, and new forms of user interface
(UI), as well as an attempt to create a feminist artificial intelligence (AI). Inspired by the
work of the maker movement, critical design, Arte Útil, the critical engineering manifesto,
Xenofeminism, and the Feminist Principles of the Internet, Feminist Data Set is a multi-
year project designed to counteract bias in data and machine learning.

In machine learning, data defines the algorithm: it determines what the algorithm does.


    , https://www.gizmodo.com.au///hp-face-tracking-webcams-dont-recognise-black-people/.
 In this way, data is activated – it has a particular purpose, being as important as the code
 of the algorithm. But so many algorithms exist as proprietary software, as black boxes
 that are impossible to unpack. For instance, why does Facebook's timeline serve up cer-
 tain posts at certain times by certain users? Why do you see the photos of some friends
 more than others? Facebook's timeline is driven by a black box algorithm designed
 to give you selective and 'important' content. The standards defining exactly what is
'important' are determined by Facebook and are not shared with the general public, nor
 are they open to public critique or feedback. How Facebook responds and processes
 a user's data is considered proprietary. As a user, you do not own your data, Facebook
 does. How Facebook chooses to feed your own data back to you is considered Facebook's
 proprietary content.

 Data inside of software, and especially in social networks, comes from people. What
 someone likes, when they talk to friends, and how they use a platform is human data –
 it's not cold and mechanical, nor is it latent, already lying there waiting to be scooped
 up. Data inside of social networks is intimate data, because conversations and social
 interactions, be they IRL or online, are varying forms of intimacy. Who people are, what
 they post, what they like and dislike, how they interact with one another – all these
'things' are completely human. And those 'things' are also data.

Feminism and Technology

Feminist Data Set imagines data creation, as well as data sets and archiving, as an act of
protest. At a time where so much personal data is caught and hidden by large technol-
ogy companies, used for targeted advertising and algorithmic suggestions, what does it
mean to make a data set about political ideology, one designed for use as protest? How
can data sets come from creative spaces? How can they be communal acts and works?
What would it look like for a community to make a data set about that same community?
It might be a self-portrait or a protest, it might demand to be seen, it might be an inter-
vention, a confrontation – or all of the above. It can be incredibly political.What about how
a system then interprets that data? What if that system were also open to critique as well
as community input?

Ethical, communal, 'hackable' design and technology is a start towards an equitable future.
It allows for community input, and for a community to drive or change a decision about a
product, its technical capability, and its infrastructure. Feminist Principles of the Internet,
a manifesto that addresses how to build feminist technology for the internet, builds upon
this ethos by recognizing that, in the process of making technical infrastructure, who it is
built for has political ramifications. Feminist Principles of the Internet pushes open source
technology and communities further by demanding space for marginalized groups and
intent within technology, and it's this ethos in which Feminist Data Set exists.

Feminist Principles of the Internet, alongside theories like cyborg feminism and Xenofem-
inism, call for a change in technology and how it functions, as well as a change of
leadership and ownership for that technology.
                              (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                                         




and matrix for Feminist Data Set,.

The manifesto of Feminist Principles of the Internet demands a redefinition and re-pur-
posing of technology and open source: 'Women and queer persons have the right to
code, design, adapt, and critically and sustainably use ICTs and reclaim technology as a
platform for creativity and expression, as well as to challenge the cultures of sexism and
discrimination in all spaces'. Within this document, Feminist Principles of the Internet
define 'agency' as a necessary form of empowerment. 'We call on the need to build an
ethics and politics of consent into the culture, design, policies, and terms of service of
internet platforms. Women's agency lies in their ability to make informed decisions on
what aspects of their public or private lives to share online'. Feminist Data Set exists
within those realms of both technology and agency, as a critique on current machine
learning infrastructure and practices, as well as a technical framework, critical method-
ology, and practice-based artwork attempting to address these issues.

Critical Design as a Medium

This reexamining of what software can and should do is similar to the creation of 'Critical
Design', an initiative that addresses the limitations of product design. Feminist Data Set is
inspired by this critical lens, taking aspects of the critical design movement but applying it to


machine learning. 'Critical Design' as a term was coined in  by Anthony Dunne, stemming
from a practice he developed with Fiona Raby when they were research fellows at the Royal Col-
lege of Art. Critical Design as a practice 'is one among a growing number of approaches that aim
to present and define interrogative, discursive, and experimental approaches in design practice
and research'. Critical design demands that design stop existing in terms of capitalist production,
which is a function of product design, and push product design towards self-examination and
cultural critique. Dunne and Raby argue that:

     the design profession needs to mature and find ways of operating outside the tight
     constraints of servicing industry. At its worst, product design simply reinforces capitalist
     values. Design needs to see this for what it is, just one possibility, and to develop alter-
     native roles for itself. It needs to establish an intellectual stance of its own, or the design
     profession is destined to lose all intellectual credibility and [be] viewed simply as an agent
     of capitalism.

By redefining how product design can be created, critical design also creates new ways for
an audience to engage with design and understand all of the different facets of design in
their daily lives.

Similarly, the maker movement helped redefine hardware engineering as a space of explora-
tion and engagement by redefining 'engineering'. Engineering went from an expertise held by
seasoned computer scientists to a method of investigation and construction that also welcomed
everyday tinkerers and explorers. The growing ease and quickness of creating technology moved
engineering into a space of play, and with that, into a space where anyone could create, chang-
ing what it meant to be 'an engineer'. With the advent of the small, affordable, adaptable, and
easy-to-use Arduinos (microcomputers), the debut of the company Adafruit, the creation of the
fair/conference Maker Faire (a gathering for maker enthusiasts), and now with LittleBits (an
educational company that creates small toys that teach children about electrical engineering, a
precursor to getting an Arduino), the revolution of the maker movement is similar to the citizen
science movement – it's a technology-for-everyone revolution. When technology components
are easy to engage with, able to be both used and remixed, they create a diversity of projects
as well as a diversity of community. It's revolutionary because it creates new spaces but also
allows for the examination of processes, like traditional computer science, that once existed in
the 'walled garden' of the academy. When institutionalized processes are opened up, becoming
open source, they are re-adapted for an entire community. These processes allow for more input,
and one could argue, more equity. But that's in an ideal world – there are still plenty of issues
of racism and sexism, as well as gatekeeping, inside both the open source movement and the
maker movement. That being said, the ability to augment, change, remix, or 'fork' an experience,
technology and code is what makes 'making' an important movement in the modern world.

Feminist Data Set operates in a similar vein to Thomas Thwaites' Toaster Project. In this critical


                           (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                           




design project, Thwaites built a commercial toaster from scratch, from melting iron ore to building
circuits and creating a new plastic toaster body mold. However, Feminist Data Set takes a critical
and artistic view of software, particularly machine learning. What does it mean to thoughtfully
make machine learning, to carefully consider every angle of making, iterating, and designing?
Every step of this process needs to be thoroughly re-examined through a feminist lens, and like
Thwaites' toaster, every step has to actually work.

The Process of Feminist Data Set

 Originally, Feminist Data Set started as a collaborative data set, built through a series of work-
 shops that aimed to address bias in artificial intelligence. The iterative workshops are key; by
'slowly' gathering data in physical workshops, we allow a community to define feminism. But
 I also, workshop by workshop, examine what is in the data set so that I can course-correct
 to address bias. I viewed this as farm-to-table sustainable data set 'growing'. Are there too
 many works by cisgender women or white women in the data set? Then I need to address
 that in future, or run follow-up workshops by creating a call for non-cis women, for women
 of color, and for pieces of work by trans creators. In December , we held a Feminist
 Data Set workshop in a queer bookstore to add works from queer poets, writers, artists, and
 community organizers to the data set.

By design, the project will eventually result in the creation of a feminist AI system. However,
there are many steps involved in the process:

.   data collection
.   data structuring and data training
.   creating the data model
.   designing a specific algorithm to interpret the data
.   questioning whether a new algorithm needs to be created to be 'feminist' in its interpretation
     or understanding of the data and the models
.   prototyping the interface
.   refining

Every step exists to question and analyze the pipeline of creating using machine learning.
Is each step feminist, is it intersectional, does any step have a bias, and how can that
bias be removed?

As a way to 'design out bias', I look to The Critical Engineering Manifesto by Julian Oliver,
Gordan Savičić, and Danja Vasiliev. The Critical Engineering Manifesto outlines ten principles
as a guide to creating engineering projects, code, systems, and ideals. Similar to critical
design, it exists to examine the role that engineering and code plays in everyday life, as well
as art and creative coding projects. Principles  and  address the role of shifting technology:

     . The Critical Engineer raises awareness that with each technological advance our
     techno-political literacy is challenged [...]

     . The Critical Engineer observes the space between the production and consumption
     of technology. Acting rapidly to changes in this space, the Critical Engineer serves to
     expose moments of imbalance and deception.

Similarly, this manifesto (as well as others) helped serve as a basis for writing the original
Feminist Data Set Manifesto, created in workshop  of the Feminist Data Set in London’s
SPACE Art and Technology in October .

     The Feminist Data Set Manifesto:

     OUR INITIAL INTENTION: to create a data set that provides a resource that can be
     used to train an AI to locate feminist and other intersectional ways of thinking across
     digital media distributed online.

     OUR INTENTIONS, in practice, over the course of two days, we created a data
     set that questions, examines, and explores themes of dominance. Inspired by the
     cyborg manifesto, our intention is to add ambivalence, and to disrupt the unities of
     truth/information mediated by algorithmic computation when it comes to expressing
     power structures in forms of domination, particularly in relationship to intersectional
     feminism.

     OUR FUTURE INTENTIONS are to create inputs for an artificial intelligence to
     challenge dominance by engaging in new materials and engaging with others. We are
     building, collaboratively, a collection.

     Through collaboration, we created a new way to augment intelligence and augmented
     intelligence systems, instead focusing on autonomous systems.

     OUR MAIN TERMS: disrupt, dominance

     MANIFESTO: we are creating a space/thing/data set/capsule/art to question domi-
     nance.

This manifesto defined the current and future intentions of the project. Feminist Data Set
must be useful, it must disrupt and create new inputs for artificial intelligence, and it must
also be a project that focuses on intersectional feminism.

To date, the project has only been gathering data. The next step in the project will be address-
ing data training and data collection. In machine learning, when it comes to labeling data and
creating a data model for an algorithm, groups will generally use Amazon's labor force platform,
Mechanical Turk, to label data. Amazon created Mechanical Turk to solve their own machine
learning problem of scale. They needed large data sets trained and labeled.







Using Mechanical Turk in machine learning projects is standard in the field; it is used every-
where from technology companies to research groups to help label data. For the Feminist
Data Set, the question is: Is the Mechanical Turk system feminist? Is using a gig economy
platform ethical, is it feminist, is it intersectional? A system that creates competition amongst
laborers, that discourages a union, that pays pennies per repetitive task, and that creates
nameless and hidden labor is not ethical, nor is it feminist.

In , I will be building, prototyping, and imagining what an ethical mechanical turk
system could look like. Created from an intersectional feminist lens, this system could be
used by research groups, individuals, and maybe even companies. This system will be
ethical in the sense that it will allow for more transparency in who trains and labels a data
set. The trainers will also be authors, and the system will save data about the data set. This
system will also give researchers or project creators the ability to see how much one trainer
has trained the data, as well as invite and verify new trainers. Additionally, project creators
will be able to pay trainers through this system by suggesting living wage payments. But
this system also creates necessary data about the data set itself. This data about the data
set includes who labeled or trained it, where are they from, when the data set was 'made'
or finished, and what's in the data set (e.g. certain kinds of faces). If machine learning is
going to move forward in terms of transparency and ethics, then a variety of issues – how
data is trained, how trainers interact with it, and how datasets are used in algorithms and
model creation – need to be critically examined as well.


Making must be thoughtful and critical to create equity. It must be open to feedback and inter-
pretation. We must understand the role of data creation and how systems can use, misuse,
and benefit from data. Data must be seen both as something created from communities, and
as a reflection of that community – data ownership is key. Data's position inside technology
systems is political, it's activated, and it's intimate. For there to be equity in machine learning,
every aspect of the system needs to be examined, taken apart and put back together. It needs
to integrate the realities, contexts, and constraints of all different kinds of people, not just the
ones who built the early Web. Technology needs to reflect those who are on the web now.

Acknowledgments

This project would not be possible without the support of Rachel Steinberg, SOHO Gallery,
the Victoria and Albert Museum, Sara Cluggage, and Irini Papadimitriou. This project exists
in the same community, and thus could not exist without the following projects and creators:
the Xenofeminism Manifesto, the works of Donna Haraway, the Cyberfeminism Index, the
Library of Missing Data sets, the Feminist Principles of the Internet, and Kimberlé Crenshaw's
canonical research.




  Behind the
 Smart World
 – Artistic
Remixing of a
 Global Data
    Breach

KairUs (Linda Kronman
  Andreas Zingerle)

BEHIND THE SMART WORLD – ARTISTIC REMIXING OF
            A GLOBAL DATA BREACH

                 KAIRUS (LINDA KRONMAN  ANDREAS ZINGERLE)

Consumer electronics such as smartphones and notebooks have become an indispens-
able part of our daily lives. The Internet of Things (IoT) is adding increasing numbers of
electronic devices onto our shopping list, devices that are forming a h surveillance
system tracking every aspect of our lives. Through planned obsolescence, life cycles of
many electronic products are significantly shortened, resulting in more e-waste. While
some obsolete devices end up in regulated e-waste centers in Europe, % of European
e-waste is illegally dumped in developing countries each year. These devices still contain
personal data that can be recovered and abused if it fell into the wrong hands.

In August  we – as the artist collective KairUs – bought  hard-drives from the
biggest West African e-waste dump (background in investigating cybercrime in our artworks, our initial aim was to examine
how criminals can access personal information from computer hard-drives retrieved from
e-waste dumps. However, the project evolved into a collaborative practice-based research
lab. Together with artists and researchers, we explored what happens to our electronic
waste, what kind of data traces of the drive's prior owners are revealed, and what envi-
ronmental and privacy threats exist.

During the research lab we were able to recover data from six of the hard-drives. The
recovered data was shared with a trusted network of artists, treated as found footage, and
remixed into experimental videos and installations. These artistic experiments confirmed
that personal data can easily be found, reused and abused by unknown third parties when
data on the hard-drives is not encrypted, properly deleted, or the drive itself not physically
destroyed. The artistic positions, interpretations and provocations were presented in several
different iterations at exhibitions and media art festivals.

The study confirms the findings of literature and media scholar Matthew Kirschenbaum who
argues that storage mediums collected at e-waste dumps can also become vehicles for data
breaches. Sociologist Jennifer Gabrys writes that our electronic waste tends to linger, first
forgotten in shoeboxes at home, then recycled, perhaps resold on a flea market or shipped
with other discarded electronics. Hence, the afterlife of our electronics provides several
opportunities for data breaches which can take place in numerous geographical locations.



     Press, .





Artists like Michaela Lakova have worked with reanimating hard-drives from local flea
markets in Romania, while artist Raphael Perret has made extensive work aimed at raising
awareness of the working conditions of Indian e-waste recyclers.

The Behind the Smart World project describes how our consumer electronics leave long-last-
ing environmental and digital traces, emphasizing how material our digital life is. Moreover,
we want to describe one model of a process oriented, artistic research lab that has evolved
through an evolving assembly of artists and researchers.

Information Diving in West Africa

Driven by the constant technological innovations of consumer electronics and the shorter
life-cycles of smart devices, consumers produce an increasing amount of e-waste each year.
If these obsolete gadgets are not properly recycled, sensitive information and personal data
can still be found on the devices:

    Some people will not wipe their hard-drives and obviously if you dispose of that com-
    puter it can be accessed by criminals [...] The problem is many of them don't know
    where they're ending up.




places on earth, .

In the recycling process, our abandoned electronics go through many vendors who can
easily access and exploit our data. Even when exporting e-waste is regulated by the Basel
Convention regarding Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their
Disposal, traders use loopholes like labeling non-functional consumer goods as ‘second
hand’ and ‘third world help’, conveying the intention of helping to bridge the digital divide.
An investigative journalist team from Germany tracked the route of two TV sets equipped
with GPS devices from a German buyback center to the street markets in Nigeria and the
Agbogbloshie e-waste dump in Ghana. Examples like this make it clear that we do not have
control over what happens to our obsolete hardware. Few of us have the technical skills to
properly delete data and make sure that it is unrecoverable.

In August , we visited one of the biggest and most toxic electronic waste dump sites in
the world, Agbogbloshie in Accra, the capital of Ghana (repair, or recycle functioning components. However, due the lack of technical equipment,
the recycling process is very limited and hence very toxic for the workers and the environ-
ment. Almost all electronics at the dump had reached their end-of-life state. By dismantling
the devices, functioning components were collected in order to be resold in bulk. Leftover
parts landed on the ground, and from this precious dirt, scavengers tried to handpick and
extract valuable metals like copper, gold, silver or aluminum.

     Unserem Schrott?', , Arte, http://infographic.arte.tv/future/follow-the-money/de/.





Besides this physical separation of e-waste, recycling components and metals, we
learned that sensitive information on old hard-drives is abused by exploiting and harass-
ing pre-owners of these storage devices. We were curious to see if it was actually pos-
sible to recover data from discarded hard-drives. To try this out, we talked to different
recyclers (varying storage capacities, produced across a range of years by different manufacturers.

Initiating the AMRO Research Lab: Behind the Smart World

Back in Europe we teamed up with the Linz-based internet culture initiative servus.at, who
also organizes the biennial art festival Art Meets Radical Openness (AMRO). Together we
started the AMRO Research Lab Behind the Smart World, which would serve as an incubator
between festival editions where artist groups are provided with resources for their research
and artistic production. Through the lab we wanted to apply artistic research methodologies
to investigate the following research questions:

•    Would these hard-drives contain personal data that can be potentially exploited?
•    What kinds of questions arise in terms of privacy and ownership of the recovered data?
•    What ethical issues are participants confronted with when treating the data as found
     footage material for artistic production?



Inspired by the open source movement and remix culture, where source material is often
reappropriated by various users in different ways, the plan was to recover data from the hard-
drives and redistribute it within a trusted network of artists, inviting them as co-researchers
and contributors to produce artworks. To realize this goal, an interdisciplinary group of artists
were invited to the Behind the Smart World ArtLab.

Remixing of a Global Data Breach

The concept of remixing and recycling ideas and content that others have produced has
a long cultural tradition. Artists from various backgrounds use these strategies in their
creative process: from experimental and found footage filmmakers, to VJing culture
and circuit-bending sound artists who hack electronic toys to create sound generators
and effect synthesizers. Street artists and media activists remix commercial or political
advertisements towards culture jamming practices and other forms of guerrilla communi-
cation. The convergence of media, the creation of Creative Commons licensing, and the
emergence of Web . platforms enable artists to collaboratively edit, remix and share
content, and to critically engage with popular culture by revealing social engineering,
endemic racism, sexism, and homophobia.,

Analyzing, reusing or recycling material that others have discarded can also reveal per-
sonal aspects about a person's life. This social engineering practice of 'information diving'
is a search for identifiable information, with the aim of collecting sensitive information
about a company or an individual. These reuse and reappropriation practices provided
the context for using the hard-drive data as material for artistic productions.

The first step to providing artists with this data was to 'reanimate' it in order to make it
accessible. In our initial attempt, all the hard-drives were hooked up to a PC and it was
immediately possible to access some data from five of the hard-drives. After this, we
tried to recover deleted data by using open source software tools. In addition to our own
efforts, we also employed a data-recovery company to assist us in recovering data from
one more hard-drive. In total, approximately  GB of personal data were recovered
from six hard-drives.

During the recovery process, we contacted a number of artists who expressed interest
in becoming co-researchers in the project, and we provided them with the recovered
data. Aiming for a diverse mix of emerging artists, we selected six European artists who
worked across various mediums: sculpture, sound, video-art, performance, and installa-
tion. We also invited Austrian artists and students from the University of Art and Design
Linz. In hindsight, one shortcoming was that no artists from countries affected by illegal






dumping of e-waste were included in the ArtLab, which would have enabled a more
diverse approach to the problem. The overall project grew through various opportunities,
our funding framework, and our own personal resources. These naturally restricted the
scope, and the overall project can therefore be considered quite Eurocentric. However,
the main objective was to discuss the after-effects of our Western consumer electronics
culture, and we believe our chosen approach contributes meaningfully to this discourse.

ArtLab

Over an extended weekend, eight international and four Austrian artists gathered for
the ArtLab in Linz. The first evening kicked off with the symposium and talks from the
invited experts, including data broker researcher Fieke Jansen (Tactical Tech Collective),
data recovery specialist Can Sintiras (ECS Global) and data forensic expert Prof. Michael
Sonntag (Johannes Kepler Universität). After the talks we gave detailed insights into our
own research and the data acquisition process of the hard-drives. These were followed
by presentations from the artists, who each outlined their interests and concerns while
analyzing the data. Furthermore, a visit to an e-waste recycling center (how e-waste is handled in Europe, using heavy machinery, considering health and securi-
ty standards, and applying strategies against illegal e-waste trade. Group discussions with
an emphasis on personal and collaborative research questions were followed by hands-
on experiments such as visualizing data through sonification, microscopic photo scans
of hard-drive parts, and attempts to reverse-engineer the contact details of prior owners.





Presenting Outcomes of Artistic Research

For a deeper insight we initiated a conversation amongst a wider group of artists concerning
their research-led practice working with data, which we published in the book: Behind the
Smart World – saving, deleting and resurfacing data. Each book section is introduced by a
theoretical text, which provides an overview and raises specific concerns, followed by artistic
and activist strategies that expose hegemonic power structures, creatively revealing how we
might deal with our data in today's 'smart world'.

For the biennial AMRO festival exhibition, selected participants from the ArtLab and the book
publication presented their artworks. The exhibition was curated through network meetings
and an open call. Throughout the festival, artists organized guided exhibition tours, while a
series of workshops and performances completed the program. In the following paragraphs
we focus on several of the artworks that deal with the recovered data.

Martin Reiche's artwork Shell Performance (recovered hard-drives. The installation sifts through the masses of personal files from the
unidentified previous owners and transforms them into an ASCII art-inspired digital collage
that focuses on audio files, documents, images and videos. In cycling through these files, the
artwork highlights our personal relationship to data and the devices it is stored on, provoking
critical questions around consumerism, privacy, and digital and electronic waste management.

Video artist Fabian Kühfuß produced a found footage collage from the browsing history of
one hard-drive called Shopimation (thumbnails in sync with a catchy song he found on the hard-drives music library, creating
a choreographed animation of the pre-owner's aesthetic dreams. If, as Flusser argues, the
techno-imagination is an approach of coding a function of the meaning of techno-pictures,
Shopimation uses those thumbnails to build up the subjective code of an aesthetic. In doing
so, the artwork transcodes the very private dreams and desires of the drive's prior owner,
visualizing who they would like to be.

We (KairUs) created a trilogy of artworks called Forensic Fantasies (with data breaches of private information. The first artwork is called Not a Blackmail (a) and explores the possibility of extorting the hard-drive's prior owner. Besides finding
sensitive information about the owner, it is crucial to be able to contact them in order to
make one's demands. Rather than blackmailing the person, we became curious whether it
was possible to contact them. Therefore, we exhibited a ready-to-be-posted package, con-
taining the recovered data that we want to return, along with a letter directed to the address
of the prior owner.








The second artwork, Identity theft (ming. Based on previous research into online fraud, we suspect that recovered images were
used to create fraudulent profiles for future romance scamming. In this installation,  of
the fraudulent online profiles using the same images found on the hard-drive are combined
with clips of popular Nollywood found footage that cover the topic of romance scams from a
West African pop-culture perspective.

The third artwork, Found Footage Stalker (images found on one of the hard-drives. Over a number of years, we gain highly personal
insights into the lifestyle of the prior owner, following them to wild parties with friends, trips
to amusement parks, and private Christmas celebrations with their family. Flipping through
the images provokes a similar feeling to stalking a stranger on social media. Despite the
rather uninteresting photo material, one starts to create stories and attach a personality to
these fragmented digital representations. By presenting them in a classic photo album, we
approach the material as found footage, ready for remixing and creating new artworks. By
excavating personal data from amongst the trash, the artwork intersects with earlier artistic
practices of remixing and reappropriation.

Michaela Lakova’s installation DEL?No, wait!REW (one hard-drive and presents them to the viewer. The installation aims to prompt viewers with
an ethical choice: save the file by publishing it online or deleting it. The published images are
displayed on the artist's website, while the deleted files will be recovered again, saved once
more, only to face the decisions of future users. For the AMRO exhibition Lakovas installation
was using data from our hard-drives.

Behind the Smart World linked data breaches with electronic waste by exploring how data is
collected, recorded, stored, and erased, resurfacing in unexpected ways. During the Research
Lab it became evident that our hard drives and other storage mediums are intertwined in
complex techno-ecologies. With a group of artists from the Behind the Smart World network,
we continued collaborating, creating an interactive world-map. Mapping the Smart World
examines the life-cycles of consumer electronics and network technologies, beginning from
mineral mining, through to refining elements, producing metal alloys, magnets, and other
components, and finally assembling consumer goods in our 'smart world'. Along with this
supply chain mapping, the project maps the data centers that hold a key position in our
everyday device use. At the end of this life-cycle, electronic waste once again becomes a
source of raw materials such as metals and plastic. This map provides a framework for the
future exploration of research topics.

On opposite page:
photos by Janez Janša.



Acknowledgements

We want to thank Ushi Reiter and servus.at for providing the opportunity to curate the
first AMRO Research Lab. Further we want to give a special thank you to all the participat-
ing artists and researchers: Audrey Samson, Can Sinitiras, Emilio Vavarella, Emöke Bada,
Fabian Kühfuß, Fictilis, Fieke Jansen, Ivar Veermäe, Joakim Blattmann, Andreas Zingerle
and Linda Kronman (KairUs), Leo Selvaggio, Lilian Beidler, Marit Roland, Marloes de Valk,
Martin Reiche, Michael Wirthig, Michaela Lakova, Owen Mundy, Pim Zwier, Raphael Perret,
Dr. Michael Sonntag, Shu Lea Cheang, Simon Krenn, Stefan Tiefengraber, Matthias Urban,
Michaela Lakova, Times of Waste, Wolfgang Spahn.

docs/cult_borr_ebook/
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, .
Kronman, Linda and Zingerle, Andreas (eds) *Behind the Smart World** – saving, deleting and Resurfacing
Data*, Linz: servus.at, , Also available at: http://publications.servus.at/-Behind_the_Smart_World/.
Oteng-Ababio, Martin, Owusu George and Chama, Mary. 'Intelligent Enterprise: Wasting, Valuing and
Re-valuing Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment', The Geographical Journal , no.  ():
'Exhibition: "Behind the Smart World – Saving, Deleting, Resurfacing data"', Radical Openness Research
 Blogs,  March , http://research.radical-openness.org//.
Servus.at, https://core.servus.at/.
Warner, Jason. 'Understanding Cyber-crime in Ghana: A View From Below', International Journal of Cyber
    (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS   




  Getting Lost
and Unlearning
   Certainty:
    Material
 Encounters in
 an Electronic
Craft Practice

    David Cole 
Hannah Perner-Wilson

GETTING LOST AND UNLEARNING CERTAINTY: MATERIAL
  ENCOUNTERS IN AN ELECTRONIC CRAFT PRACTICE

                       DAVID COLE AND HANNAH PERNER-WILSON
Although Hannah is a maker/artist/engineer and David an educator/learning designer/writer,
we both work in the same realm of DIY craft technology involving electronics, and consider
ourselves to have a material practice. By 'material practice' we mean a process (time and
energy spent) of interacting with tangible materials – both to construct and share knowledge
about the world, and to express and share our ideas with the world. The material nature of
our textile and paper electronics practices – thinking of electronics in terms of materials – is
a necessary part of our craft which we see as standing in contrast to other common DIY ways
of building and learning about electronics, which are very much shaped by a kit-of-parts
approach and a workmanship of certainty.
Together we reflect how a workmanship of risk, and a more connective tactic or kit-of-no-parts
approach to building electronics can create transformative dialogues with materials and each
other. As a means of preparation for this piece, we engaged in a -week handwritten letter
exchange – a distinctly material practice these days – during which we wrote to each other in
order to expose the role of materials in our respective processes.

Electronic Textiles Meets Paper Engineering with Electronics
Hannah: I spend my days crafting electronic textiles, imagining what this technology, worn on
our bodies, will allow us to sense, to communicate, to become. As an explorer of new mate-
rials, I create soft circuits and textile sensors that I document and share on How To Get What
You Want and A-Kit-Of-No-Parts, hoping to inspire others to join me in this material practice.
The idea of a no-parts-kit represents a challenge. What could be the opposite of an of-parts
approach to making, collaborating and sharing? In a Kit-of-Parts approach, functionality is
compartmentalized into discrete building blocks and an overarching system describes how
these blocks are able to interact with one another. This enables people to collaborate in creating
and sharing blocks for the same system, and potentially allows a building process with these
blocks to be less energy intense because much of the connection work is already solved by the
system. Much of our experience with the materials of electronics is informed by this approach.
Alternative ways of making, collaborating, and sharing get overlooked because of its domi-
nance. Thus with a Kit-of-No-Parts I want to draw attention to this fact, and challenge myself
and others to explore other ways of making, collaborating, and sharing. These observations
are very much informed by my experience working with e-textiles, where I blend practices of
craft and engineering, bringing together old textile techniques with new material technologies.
Starting points for my work vary from open-ended playful explorations of materials/tools/tech-
niques in order to discover interesting narratives and diverse ways of doing things (such as
hand-embroidering elaborate circuitry onto a funeral gown to speak about possible futures), to
directed commissions looking to problem-solve and realize concrete ideas (such as developing
robust hard-soft connections, insulation methods, sensor and actuator designs).


                            (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                            



Whether I'm exploring or solving, I find myself seeking direct, hands-on encounters with the
materials of electronics – materials that due to their abilities to conduct, resist, isolate, store, or
generate electrical current are able to make up what we think of as electronics. I'm drawn to
this more interactive style of dialogue because it allows me to engage more of my bodily sensors
(sensations) and actuators in real-time debate-like conversation. There is this image of future
technology being fully constructed by machine and a workmanship of certainty. I'm drawn to
exploring the other end of the spectrum, towards what furniture designer and design theorist
David Pye's describes as the workmanship of risk. How uncertain, how intimate, how messy,
how physically and collaboratively connected can we get with the materials of electronics?
David: I remember the moment after completing a degree in literature when I decided I would
turn to boatbuilding as a way to engage with a tradition and body of work where the materials
would not talk to me. Language, theme, story, critique, and the craft of argument that I had
been focused on created worlds and felt, as social, narrative, textual projects, uniquely nego-
tiable; the forms, tools, techniques, and materials in boatbuilding did not. I was interested in
understanding what learning and attention felt like in relation to physical things. After that I
spent several years moving between boat work and teaching, between wood and words, which
was, I've understood, an effort at finding a kind of balance for how I engage with the world.
I'm an educator and writer by training who works with technology, curriculum, and teacher
professional development. I work in- and out-of-schools with projects and learner communities
that focus on literacy, college and career-readiness, and the use of technology via platforms,
tools, and interest-driven, production-centered work in which learners develop and share
their ideas through artifacts, projects, and collaborations. In the last five years I've focused
on creative learning with paper and electronics, which has been, very clearly, a return to that
initial impulse to blend fast and slow, to understand relational ways of seeing and thinking as
complementary and connected to physical things we make.
I was familiar with Hannah's work through Leah Buechley's High-Low Tech group at MIT. I was
struck by the ways in which she was opening up electronic components and systems, treating
them as material, and being deeply mindful about recording what she was doing. The breadth
of her documentation and her transparency with process and materials seemed to be much
more than a supporting aspect to her work. It appeared to be absolutely central to what she
was doing, perhaps even a singular objective. It was also exciting to see how the formats she
uses for documentation are designed as open invitations for others to join in the work.
The work I do treats paper – the trusted format of the engineer's notebook or the artist's jour-
nal – as the platform and foundational material on which one builds small electronics projects
and annotates and decorates those constructions. It's a personal, sequential story of learning
that's about reflection and self-expression. It's also meant to be shared as a record of how we
assemble our ideas and our materials. It's this affinity around materials and documentation
that set our dialogue in motion. To this day our conversations continue to unfold without having
met one another in real life.


Getting Lost by Following Materials - Hannah's Practice
As somebody who spends as much time with materials as with people, I recognize my own
experience in the current discussion of a material turn in the humanities – our societies' grow-
ing recognition of the material influence on our constructions of reality. My relationship with
the textiles and electronics that I've spent the last ten plus years of my life with have gotten me

with. Over the last year or two this wondering has grown from a vague awareness into a quite
substantial urge to understand better the extent and qualities of this influence on my making.
By reflecting on our practices through the letter exchange with David, four things stand out to
me as insights that I'd never before seen this clearly:

      al-lead adventure as much as it is departing from social frameworks of value.



Journeying with Thermochromic Pigment
During the  week period that David and I were corresponding, I was amid a material-lead
adventure exploring thermochromic pigment, which I have attempted to capture in word
and image in figure  and .


Following Materials
 Contrary to popular belief (and Rule # of art educator Corita Kent's Immaculate Heart
 College Art Department Rules), I would argue that creating and analyzing are not nec-
 essarily different processes that need to be separated. Selecting, collecting, choice, and
 decision are not independent actions but rather the result of situations with many other
'actors' involved. If one takes the time, one can embark on an endless unpacking of
 underlying motives/motivations/reasons/intuitions/tendencies. Even just unpacking a few
 layers deep, I got a sense for the vastness, intricacies, and interdependencies packed
 up in every decision – decisions that I don't make, but am a part of negotiating. My
 conditioning to perceive myself as an individual capable of achieving objectivity through
 analytical thinking keeps me constantly striving to untangle myself from these intricacies,
 although I recognize this impossibility, and would like to entangle myself further.
My histories draw me towards one thing over another. I began to use the word interesting
in the sense of its origin to be between (combining inter as 'between' + esse as 'be' = to
be between) very purposely in order to capture my sense of wanting to get closer, deeper,
further into something without being able to better articulate why. An expression of interest
became a recognition of my entanglement in a complex system which I could influence by
channeling my energies. To invent came to mean to direct my energy to excavate where my
interests lie, to uncover what is already there, rather than to 'make something out of nothing'.
Thus to be a good maker is to be a good listener/observer/sensor, and as I paid more
attention to myself, not as a leader but as a follower of materials, I saw some strikingly
obvious connections between the properties of the materials I was working with and the
concepts (the stories, the applications) that emerge from working with them.








Where Stories Come From, Material Properties are Concepts
With my newfound appreciation of material's equal role in our making, I began to see
clear connections between a material's property (its abilities to afford our interactions/
experiences with/of the world) and the conceptual narratives we so often claim as the
result of our ability to abstract the physicality of these materials and claim them as our
own thoughts. As Donna Haraway has put it, 'it matters what matters we use to think
other matters with'. Two such material-property concepts I experienced emerging from
my material encounters were CHANGE and CONTROL.
Thermochromic pigment: micro-encapsulated liquid crystals reorientate to produce an
apparent change of color based on outside influence of temperature. They are the matter
that is changing, but I am the one perceiving change and thus thinking of change: change
in color, change in temperature, change as reaction, change is action, change reveals...
What does it reveal? What triggers the change in temperature? If nothing changes would
anything happen? If nothing happens, can anything change?
Conductive thread: continuous filaments of copper spun with a synthetic core are able
to conduct electricity while being flexible and durable enough to travel distances, to
survive being sewn, worn, and washed. By channeling the flow of electricity I am able to
create and direct heat, to control it from afar. But there is also the heat of my body that
I can not control. How to combine these two sources of heat so that only in combination
is there control. And how to use this shared control to reveal a different perspective
within the system?
The two paragraphs above are an attempt to capture the conversations that happen
between the materials and myself. This is how I go about developing projects and channel
energy in the system, by discovering ‘stories’. Mika Anusas and Tim Ingold speak to this
in their piece ‘The Charge Against Electricity’ when they write, ‘the prosecution draws
our attention to four key entailments of electrification. These are remoteness, conduction,
insulation, and sensorial subtlety’. In this sense I view CHANGE and CONTROL as entail-
ments of thermochromism and electrical conductivity which together lead me – via notions
of revealing, remote control, and power – to experience a questioning origins of agency.

Transitioning Between Abstract and Tangible
I like to think of ‘thinking’ as abstract (immaterial) making, and ‘making’ as tangible
(material) thinking. We humans are constantly exerting ourselves in order for information
to flow between these two forms of activity. There is much friction here and I experience
getting stuck on one side or the other. But one also develops ways of overcoming the
friction – running in circles to warm up, to build up the energy, to make the jump – lit-
erally taking the tools in my hands and making something I’ve done before to remind
myself and ease the way for information to flow from my mind into my hands. Caught up
on one side of the action, the other can soon appear menial. Transitions require leaps of
faith and bursts of energy, both in oneself and in the material. Decision-making becomes
transitioning, not only through but also in the body – in this collaboration between the
analytical mind and the gut feeling.



bag of thermochromic pigment that changes from black
to white at °C. Placing it in the center of my empty
worktable and thinking: What can I mix it with? What
can I apply it to? ----------------- Rummage through my
working room, the kitchen, basically the whole house,
and pull out a selection of materials that felt suita-
ble. //As soon as I looked at the selection of materi-
als, I see that my choices reveal things I’d not been
consciously aware of while picking them. The table is
full of flat, lightweight materials of natural and tech-
nological origins. From prior experience <I knew> that
the more dense the material the more power it took to
heat and the longer it took to cool down again. +//
Every time I make a decision, I’m revealing underly-
ing motivations, intuitions, expectations that can be
uncovered if I only take the time to reflect. --------
-------- Reduced my selection back to - items to help
myself focus on some concrete experiments.++//There is a
gap between thinking-about-making and making. It requires
energy to make the jump. Energy in the form of courage,
hope, stamina. //How to make the jump when the energy is
not there? >>>>>>>>>>>>> Going through familiar motions
               (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS   




with the most obvious of opportunities. Mixing the pig-
ment with acrylic paint, textile paint…… painting it on
fabrics, papers, seashells, pine needles, transistors….
>>>>>>>>>>>>> Hooking up the ends of a cm piece of
steel thread to a V battery and using it to heat the
what I had prepared. Swiping it across my samples and
observing them change colour. +++//By simply doing
something with the materials I had set myself up for
discovering something interesting [origin of word in-
teresting: from inter- ‘between’ + esse ‘be’ - to be
between] that could then lead me further in. |<<<One
tends towards familiar ground when entering new land-
scapes” “First discoveries that excite... “(quotes
from letter, //)>>>|<<<“Submerge myself in the
process” (quote from letter, //)>>>|------------
Thin, porous fabrics coated in the thermochromic mixm,
held up to my noise/mouth, breathing out causes heat to
spread, breathing in sucks cold air though the materi-
al. ++++//This interplay of bodily heat and electronic
heat drew me in…. ------------------------------- Once
submerged in the process, it was easy to keep meander-
ing…. one idea leads to the next to the next… until
I had lost track of what the point was. It was here
that i made some of my most surprising and motivating
discoveries >>>>>> Continuing to mix the pigment with

er would have thought that the pigment would mix so
well with wax! And that I would return to my childhood
enthusiasm for poking my fingers into melting candles,
dripping it on snow and making thermochromic candles.
I used snow to make moulds, bringing in the outdoors,
seasonal materials, adding lines of thread for compos-
ite flexibility and surface coverage…. +++++// Exper-
iments in creating surface heating with carbon paint
were not successful. --------------------- ((((Wanting
to be submerged, lost, aimless…. but also needing to
feel comfortable in this state. grappling for what I
had experience with.)))) +++++++//What I found most
intriguing was the interplay between the electrically
controllable heating and the bodily (uncontrollable)
heating and cooling caused by breathing as well as the
heat from regular body temperature. I wanted to achieve
a setup that would allow for these two different sourc-
es of heat to meet through the material actuation in
order to reveal something that would otherwise not oc-
cur. ----------->>>>>>>>_______I am able to electri-
cally change the colour of the thermochromic wax mix
by embedding lines of steel thread (- Ohm and can
withstand high temp) in the wax, crimping their ends
to copper threads, powering them from a .V LiPo bat-
tery. Controlling the heating via a MOSFET triggered
by a microcontroller. Controlling the microcontroller
with a sensor. Controlling the sensor with my body
heat._______<<<<<<<<---------- ::: Combining wax with
threads resulted in a rigid yet fragile structures that
could hold their form while retaining some flexibility.
Since the circuitry was also comprised of connected
threads it should also become such an integral part
of the structure. Since the wax became soft with the
same heat that was intended to change the colour the
shape could shift, and I would love to to collapse. :::
Pressing my face into the fold snow and then dripping
molten thermochromic beeswax onto the cold snow mound.
I was making a mask, a object to use to tell <my_story>
of change and control. */>

captured in image and text, .
                            (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                                 




paper, .


Getting Lost – the Value of Community
Initially, I really thought that all my talk of 'getting lost' was about departing on an adventure,
venturing out with new materials into new terrain in order to discover new ideas. But now I would
say that getting lost is not about wandering around in a new environment, it is a departing from
one's established environment. There is no new environment to enter; an environment is always
a constructed situation in which one exists. Leaving that environment is the challenge, or rather
becoming unfamiliar with it in order to experience it anew. This requires getting lost in the process,
losing one's frames of reference. Scary, but desirable, as this ability can lead one to renewed
perspectives (not necessarily new ones) on one's relations with other/things. In his book on flow
theory, Mihaly Csíkszentmihályi refers to a similar process of assimilating what one experiences
during flow as the value of the experience on one's formation of self.
The ability of community to provide trust and confidence to venture outside established frame-
works of sense-making is important here. Having the letter-writing as a process of communicating
with another human being was a huge grounding experience. I'm not sure if David realized how
much he was helping me, possibly even guiding me through this part of my adventure. I see
this very clearly now as the role of community in any process. To provide a grounding framework
with which we can sustain our making endeavors. It is the presence of peers and the feeling of
community and shared practice and processes that provides us with the necessary resources
to keep going and navigate the unknown with enough confidence to play, dare, and explore.



Unlearning Certainty Through Familiar Rituals - David's Practice
In one of our letter exchanges, I wrote this snippet to Hannah: 'To find a way in. To take
another step. To move towards something even when one doesn't know what it is or can
be. And to believe it will be something [...]'. We were writing back and forth on the intuitive,
intentional way we bump around in the dark, finding clues to treasure hunts of our own mak-
ing. It's very much a workmanship of risk, this idea that shape, purpose, and understanding
emerge from an incremental, accretive process, which begins in a bumper car space where
things collide energetically, by design.
I organize my projects around communication, documentation, narrative, and storytelling. I
do most of my work with paper and electronics with teachers and with learners who have not
had any exposure to making or invention work. In this regard, my interest is non-technical
and very much about creating conditions for going deeper with a question or following a
thread of interest or inspiration. Design thinkers frame aspects of this idea with the How
Might We... prompt. Technical teams sometimes reference the approach as building 'creative
confidence'. The language of innovation and iteration – fail early, fail often, have faith in your
ideas, see them through – applies here, but often it's aligned with directed problem-solving
or the rhetoric of success-making. This sometimes supersedes or co-opts what I want to
focus on: the nuanced experiences with doubt, persistence, curiosity, and motivation that
we each live with and work through in small, important ways when doing this kind of work.
I use a limited set of materials and rely on familiar rituals and active routines associated
with writing, annotating, sketching, drawing, and assembling to create the framework for
a learning experience. I work mostly with program coordinators, with students and edu-
cators in the middle grades, kids aged  to  and their teachers. I've watched, again
and again, how learners of all ages jump right in, not shying away from or pre-judging the
components or technical aspects in the projects, because their workspace – the paper,
the notebook – is so familiar. The hybrid constructions they create are evocative, personal
expressions of a multi-modal literacy that remixes the old and the new, blending traditions
in documentation practice and craft techniques with the affordances in new, technical
materials to extend their ideas.
This work sits at the center of a Venn Diagram composed of process, tools, and community.
Thinking about projects as sequential exercises, I've found I can arrange these terms in
whatever order and benefit from the cumulative effect that results from considering each
of the categories separately and together as they amplify in the progression from one to
the next. The through-line in this triplet is always the materials. It's a reminder for me
that material encounters are inseparable from the circumstances and applied context in
which they're unfolding.


Appropriate Tooling and Materials
In the spring of  I was working on an ongoing prototyping project, Open Data/Open
Minds (ODOM), exploring papercraft as a GUI or display for data. I have had help in this proj-
ect from Natalie Freed, a crafter, artist, computer scientist, and teacher who is exceptionally
skilled with interfaces between physical materials (craft objects, books, paper, textiles) and
computation. Natalie has been a longtime partner in the ODOM work, helping to develop
a string of iterative prototypes and demonstration projects that connect paper and the web.




Together we were preparing for a workshop with the Providence Public Library's Data Navi-
gators program, a semester-long elective for high school students on the basics of Tableau,
the enterprise data visualization platform. Natalie and I would travel to Rhode Island for a day
of activities to introduce the basics of paper circuitry and visual block programming using
the Chibi Chip by Chibitronics as an alternative and introductory way to visualize abstract
information. We were working on learning routines, interfaces, and technical challenges that
go with parsing data sets and pulling internet signals onto paper so information can be 'read'
using an output like an LED or a servo.
This work in Providence, supported by the Civic Switchboard project, a consortium focused
on libraries and local civic data ecosystems, would be a learning experience in 'low-resolution
data' – meaning single data points or observations drawn from research and rendered on paper
with light, in a simple material presentation, as a complement to the computational breadth
and depth available in a data visualization on screen.
Connections between people and organizations, and the circumstances that invite and sustain
collaborations, create something nearly as tangible as physical materials: trust. We constantly
take steps forward together, not knowing exactly what will come of it, and put things into the
world. This way of thinking sees an arrangement of materials, an object one can take pride in,
as revealing a next step. Being able to imagine what might come next always feels to me like
an expression of agency and capacity. In retrospect, the process unfolds like a story. I share
with Hannah the idea that materials can be narrative, and that narrative and the objects we
create are iterative examples of questions and ideas becoming, for a moment, tangible demon-
strations of confidence and conviction, the result of a dialogue between people and materials.
Because I'm involved in education, my work is socially situated. I see making, the resurgence
of hands-on learning, and the rituals and traditions it's based upon, as an equity project, which
means I'm thinking about individuals' experiences in relation to the organizations and environ-
ments in which they're learning. This point of view emerged in our conversations in specific
ways. Six years ago, when I started to work with paper and electronics, I saw how educational
organizations were taking notice of making as a resurgent affirmation of the value of hands-on
learning in an age of technology, but in that scaling activity, there were challenges. Low-cost
hardware often required an understanding of basic electrical engineering and new programming
languages; packaged kits might blackbox functional and material encounters so interactions with
interfaces, inputs and outputs were simplified, diminishing learning opportunities for working with
or assembling systems; and often these products were mainstreaming at price points that would
put the experience well out of reach for learners who might benefit the most.
to drive adoption of computer science in K classrooms. This suggested, in turn, that fluency
with data and activated civic engagement would become the next essential competencies worthy
of attention from learning designers and institutional education. I started thinking about data
as material (zero marginal cost) and the notebook + low-cost electronics (limited expense per
learner) as an accessible, user-friendly way to develop new skills and literacies through creative
documentation and exploration.
Natalie and collaborators at NEXMAP.org, the small non-profit I work with, began exploring these
ideas as a learning stack in a series of prototypes we called the Open Data/Open Minds project.

Notebooks: Grade , San Francisco. Geology Unit, four lessons, each one includes a paper circuitry activity;
students make their own battery clips, document their learning.
The culminating activity is a demonstration portfolio – two pieces of paper, folded, cut, nested to make a four-
part sequential reflection for each lesson.
A final illustration and circuit story for the project, structured as an open storyboard, with illumination.
San Francisco, CA; teacher professional development workshop on Advanced Paper Circuitry, Kodiak, AK, .
Notebook: Middle School Teacher, Advanced Paper Circuitry Workshop, Kodiak, Alaska. First soldering attempt
- using notebook as practice space.
Documentation on ATtiny; first effort with the microcontroller failed; annotations with the burned out IC;
Arduino and sample code sketch for experimentation.
Alternating LEDs tell a story in sequence in a circuit and illustration; a servo setup for a foldable panda whose
head rotates; from Automate Your Ideas, booklet # in the Hack Your Notebook series.
Natalie Freed’s workbench, final steps for the project in Program Your Pages – copper tape, microcontroller,
circuit sticker, art work – the second volume in the Hack Your Notebook series.
Program Your Pages; teacher leaders working on a project, preparing to solder; demonstration in a journal.
Open Data/Open Minds – Pop-up Data Dashboard for Austin, TX; real-time feeds for temp., AQI, traffic, time;
on display at Mozfest  w/Dr. Elisabeth Sylvan, photo: Ana Lutzky @AEFsuprecherche.
Scientific Adventures for Girls at UC Berkeley, Dept. of Engineering, photo: Adriel Olmos; STEAM Learning
Intersession w/East Bay Innovation Academy, Oakland, CA. th grade: paper circuitry and design.
Steps for a workshop activity at Maker Faire  – Data viz on paper.
Noting daily activities in preparation for adding emphasis with light from an LED; prototype for Paper-to-
the-Web: a paper circuitry polling tool; data sent to Google Sheets.
Final project showcase for Data Navigators program at Providence Public Library, June, ; Tableau
workbooks and paper circuit projects.
“Low Resolution Data” projects on paper by high school students in the Rhode Island Nurses Institute
Middle College High School program.

 come with networks and the deep, particular, tactile work that occurs with physical objects
– animated my exchanges with Hannah.
I'd describe how, in contrast to her experiments and explorations with distinct materials and
physical properties, I'd be thinking about groups, people, institutions, and looking for gaps
in experience, places where agency – in whatever form – is lacking. I wrote to Hannah about
our planning work for the visit in May, '[...] I see a library running a data literacy program
for youth and think: this is remarkable, a civic institution is providing young adults with
publicly-funded pathway experiences so they can become fluent in the language of data
visualization – in the way one might have learned PowerPoint twenty years ago, as a leg up
in the workplace'. We hoped to support this proposition by introducing crafted projects and
physical materials alongside a computational application, Tableau, as a complementary GUI
assembled from paper and electronics, bits and atoms, which would function as a screen
does: as an invitation to explore ideas, share stories, and work with information in ways that
create agency and opportunity.


(S)low Resolution Datavisualization: Building Situated Literacies
There is one question that comes up often, pointing to assumptions about certainty/
uncertainty and open and closed systems, and kits of parts vs. no parts. Why bother
with paper, electronics, and this combination of craft and technology when we have
computers in our pockets? It is worth exploring the kind of value that gets added if we
take a slow approach, take apart a technical system, and use the parts to reassemble
a piece of our understanding with familiar physical materials.
 In Providence, the high school students participating in the data course at the library
 were all ^th grade women, many of them from immigrant families from Latin America
 and Africa. They were enrolled at the Rhode Island Nurses Institute Middle College, a
 public charter school providing students with experience in the healthcare industry as
 part of their high school coursework; they arrived at the session in their medical scrubs
– their dress code when visiting or assisting at hospitals and nursing homes during class
 trips or internships.
Our craft and materials excursion with paper and electronics was a hands-on supplement,
what teachers call, 'a push-in unit', intended to offer a new way of looking at their data
research. Topics the young women were working on included: infant mortality rates,
various cancer cases by state, diabetes statistics, lead levels in school drinking water,
teen pregnancy levels, and the rate of homicides and suicides involving guns.
In the afternoon, we met with adults who'd completed a similar course in Tableau. This
group of  people, ranging in age from  to , included a congressional represen-
tative for the state of Rhode Island, all of them interested in expanding their experience
with technology. One woman, a high school Spanish teacher and new mother, had taken
the course prior to her maternity leave. Thanks to training she received for free at the
library, she's now able to work from home as a business analyst.
What we found with the groups in Providence, where making and physical computing
were completely new ideas, is that the simple set of materials allowed participants to
be playful and articulate what they were seeking to share. Calculations and decisions
about how to contextualize information so it could be read in an output and interaction
on paper – a blinking LED and a switch, say – turned into useful exercises at reverse
                          (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                        



engineering a kind of word problem. How shall I use a light to render a mortality rate for a
given region? What's my blink rate for what period of time? What's the division and arithmetic
I need to get a number and an output that's meaningful? Shall I create a circuit that positions
the lights spatially, as illumination under points on a map? What colors, brightness values,
and rates of fading might I use to reveal which details?
While computational systems are uniquely suited for organizing volumes of information with
extraordinary consistency and speed, paper, too, is a system of its own, with unique char-
acteristics and associated literacies. It's a brilliant representation of the singular complexity
and character in a physical material. For learners new to ideation and iterative production
work, the affordances of paper reside in its tactile constraints (two-dimensional, fixed sizes)
and flexibility (ready to be modified, configured, annotated, reshaped). In this fashion, it
embodies and offers a means of demonstrating how ideas can be realized, tangibly, through
materials. These ideas can be shared in : relationships – person-to-person rather than
the one-to-many networked connections we've grown accustomed to via our technologies.
The introductory training the students in Providence received in data research and cleaning,
and their understanding of what they would do with their findings on screen, in Tableau,
provided them with the background and nascent domain expertise needed to transfer their
thinking to materials, to contextualize their grasp of the information, miniaturize it in certain
ways, zero in on specific details, and quickly assemble simple demonstrations on paper,
by hand. For example, the new mother in the adult class proposed a circuit system using
two LEDs and their respective blink rates to contrast the numbers of women giving birth to
healthy babies with and without the access to the assistance of a midwife.
What emerged in this introductory project and collaboration was the kind of thinking that
underpins the development of a problem statement – an essential articulation of critical
thinking and scientific inquiry that's central to every data literacy experience. For first-time
learners, even with very basic demonstration projects, paper and electronics became expres-
sive vehicles for personally relevant questions and storytelling.


Epilogue: Untangling Strategies
Coming out of this joint reflection on our practices, we realized some of our approaches,
attitudes, and tactics show significant overlap. Firstly, centering sociality and collaboration
with other people and the material itself as peers or conversation partners. Secondly, our
shared dedication to understanding electronic materials as having certain properties that can
be connected together to have something else emerge (rather than things with delineated
functionalities we can utilize at will). And lastly, the objective to allow ourselves and others
to explore in terms of a workmanship of risk.

How shall we describe our approach to making and materials?
David: Today's technologies and online networks are proof of our abilities to communicate
and collaborate on a global scale. Electrical engineers can design and manufacture the
circuits and systems that enable these connections without encountering any materials;
their understanding can remain focused on design principles and abstract descriptions
of electrical and physical properties in component datasheets. In contrast, an electronic
craftsperson produces and works with technologies informed by encounters with these
materials in order to explore possibilities for new or alternative outcomes or designs. A
workmanship of risk elevates the energy and integrity of process, and the idea of multi-

impulse, or question develops, something unique to the craftsperson, the learner, and the
material being worked and considered.
Hannah: Many of our newest tools and techniques for collaborating with materials allow us
to do so in remote CAD/CAM ways. These technologies insert a translator between ourselves
and the materials, interfering in our material relations in order to achieve predictable and
repeatable outcomes. Working with these translators can lead to wonderful conversations,
but they distance us from the materials, prioritizing mental modeling over bodily encounters.
David Pye refers to these styles of making as a workmanship of certainty and a workmanship
of risk. In the latter, at every stage in a creative, materials-based encounter, an outcome
or finished project is not certain. In this sense, the making of the object is always at risk. I
would like to expand Pye's notion of taking 'risk' in workmanship to include the risk taken in
departing from familiar frames of reference. In doing so, one might fail to make meaningful
connections with established frames of value. This is the risk of getting lost and not returning.


What is needed to achieve a workmanship of risk?
Hannah: To promote more risky workmanship with/within complex technologies we should be
looking at tools/ways that aid the sharing of information and the collaboration between humans
and non-humans (materials), and the creation of support structures that encourage us to
venture out into new territory. We could start by changing our language around collaboration.

•     To give credit where credit is due: to others, to materials.
•     To create time, space, funding, and recognition for basic experimental research.
•     To be honest about our endeavors and to reframe what is so often called 'failure' as a
      necessary part of any process.
•     To realize our connectedness within complexity.
•     To be interested in our own process and the becomings of our projects and ourselves.
•     To teach risk taking through individual curiosity, one can provide earners with opportu-
      nities to experience the full cycle – venturing out into new territory and experiencing the
      richness of insights learned from 'failure' before returning 'home' with a new perspective.

We can be alert to the affordances and especially the limitations of the platforms and language
we use that enable us to share these experiences as collaborators, contributors, and listeners
by creating situated spaces and environments for this kind of learning. And, in turn, we can
cultivate narratives that capture insights and lessons learned so they can be folded back into
one's self, creating semantic links between 'process' and 'person'.


Can a workmanship of risk be achieved practically on an institutional(ized)
level, and is this necessary?
David: Coming at a making practice as an educator I respond to the criteria Hannah offers by
thinking about the spaces where we learn and the structural elements that limit or inform how
our time is organized. The character and organizing principles in our learning settings condition
us for specific outcomes. I'm interested in common planning time and professional development





for teachers – school buildings and learning spaces with flexible plans that allow students
to gather informally and work quietly or loudly as needed. I also see possibility in block
schedules in a school day. These allow educators to collaborate across subject areas,
creating openings for open, interdisciplinary thinking that prioritize new perspectives and
the remixing of ideas.
And then there's the question of how communities and the projects they undertake are
led – the leadership element and the roles of mentors, partners, and coaches. Whether
it is a program director or, to Hannah's points, the language used to describe goals and
expectations, these ideas take me back to how I started down this path. I'm interested in
an arrangement of opposites, like wood and words, and the way physical attributes and
materials combine with generative, social rituals and expectations in learning situations.
Making brings these things to the center of the conversation. Such an approach prioritizes
the experiences of learners and also comments on the breadth and complexity we now
live with – the intricacies of our technologies, the diversity of community experience, and
the socioeconomic disparity that is so pervasive. We need to think and listen and design
intentionally like this if we're to make room for iterative, personally meaningful ideas that
emerge in our encounters with materials.


What are we taking away from this process of reflecting on our practices?

How has the process of writing this publication impact our thinking
about our practices?
Hannah: During this process I observed myself falling for two illusory extremes. On the one
hand, there was the illusion that I could use this new knowledge and insight to optimize 'my'
process, to (re)gain control. This was an illusion because I was wholeheartedly experiencing
the limitations of my control. On the other hand, I found myself falling for the idea that I
could let go, go with the flow, give up control, let the materials lead me. While enticing, this
submissive stance is impossible given my recognition that I am constantly directing my
energy and influencing the system, and thus unable to not exert any control. Given these two
extremes, the middle ground appears closer to reality: to make is to collaborate, to negotiate
energies. I can neither take nor lose control, only channel my energies in one way or another.
More than ever before, I feel a sense of making being all about collaboration with materials.
Thinking about the kit-ification of things, I'm no longer sure that a no-parts approach stands
in absolute contrast / in stark opposition to an accumulation of functionality into parts, but
rather seeks to press for an open-ness to these elements or components in a material
encounter. I think of open as in freedom of information (access to and sharing of), but also
open as in open-endedness. Such a demand for open-endedness is not only directed to
those who package and portray the details of a part, but also at the mentality of the person
drawing upon this part in their practice. How can we think open-endedly? My idea of a
workmanship of risk describes a process that is at ease with not always knowing where one
is headed.
David: Collaborating with Hannah on this piece reminds me of the value of collisions between
practices, formats, and materials. These encounters reorient our points of view and create
openings for deeper investigations. In our letter-writing, it was energizing to observe how
completely Hannah gives herself to material encounters. From time to time I would check
back on some of her project URLs and lucid documentation to remind myself of the skill
with materials she's simultaneously relying upon and letting go of.

a correlative in the fact that Natalie and I had been invited to insert an introductory paper
and electronics activity into a time-bound syllabus and course schedule about information
research routines and how-to steps with an enterprise data visualization platform. There was
a disruption of possibilities in that invitation. Together with our partners at the library, the
coordinators and the students, we were agitating both systems, so to speak, starting down
a path that will teach us things about how to push at the limits and possibilities in a diverse
collection of materials, and in our own lived experience.
Hannah: What I hope to have gained from this experience is a heightening of my senses,
enabling me to become a better listener and a better material collaborator (maker). By better,
I mean capable of taking into consideration a greater number of factors – more holistic. What
I secretly fear is that I've taken a false sense of objectivity from this process, a form of clarity.
What appears to me as a newfound holistic ability actually stands in my way of allowing
myself to 'be material'. As a next step, I'm really curious to talk with David about how such a
reflexive exercise (as this one we just completed) could be introduced in a learning setting/
as a learning experience.
XXXXXXXX


   (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS   




Making (Things)
  as Ethical
   Practice
  Wim Nijenhuis

              MAKING (THINGS) AS ETHICAL PRACTICE
                                           WIM NIJENHUIS


Matter Matters: a Reconfiguration of Classical Design

The culture of making in architecture reconfigures classical architectural practice through
its emphasis on being engaged with material – on doing instead of abstract thinking and
planning. Its 'revolutionary' principle can best be demonstrated through a microanalysis of
what the maker actually does, in comparison with the classical architect.




proportions of the facade of Tempio Malatestiano, .

Since the quattrocento, when the discipline of architecture diverged from the medieval crafts,
it has been regarded as an abstract intellectual activity, a discipline of the mind, devoted to
reason. In this way it was incorporated in the humanist movement, who saw man as deter-
mined by mind and language. The Renaissance architect and theorist Leone Battista Alberti
() depicted the architect as a person with a 'developed intellect and imagination',





one able 'to imagine whole forms in his mind without taking any notice of the materials'. The
special feature of architecture since then has not been so much its focus on the concrete
building, (which was seen as the object of 'construction' industry), as the abstract drawing.
The latter is considered the mere projection of an idea that has been developed by the 'genius',
the 'ingenium' – that is to say, the creative spirit of the architect/engineer.

 The core concept of architecture concerning the relation between creative spirit and drawing is
'design', derived from the Italian disegno and meaning 'the visual expression and clarification
 of the concept (of a building, W.N.) that someone has in her mind and that he imagines in her
 thoughts and builds up in the idea'. According to this definition, disegno has an abstract and
 a material side. The abstract side, 'theory', is the way in which the representation is formed in
 the mind of the architect. This abstract image is subsequently directed to her hand, which in
 turn concretizes it in the drawing, the latter representing the more material aspect of disegno.
 Note that in this definition the hand is a pure mechanical implement, mediating between the
 creative spirit and the drawing.

Making (things), on the other hand, is a physical affair. It does not occur between mind and
drawing, but between hand and material. We might describe it as an activity in which physical
and (in)organic entities of various kinds come together to take part in a complex process
of metamorphosis that brings into being material things. As long as the activity of making
endures, we can observe the appearance of a dynamic and variable assemblage, which is
composed of material bodies such as wood, steel, stone, paper, textiles, clay, etc. – including
tools – and also hands, eyes, and brains. Sometimes the latter series is extended with the
mouth, the feet, the knees, the forehead, the ears, the nose, the back, and eventually the
complete human body.

Compared with classical architectural design, we can understand making as a critical reconfig-
uration thereof. To be engaged with materials without thinking, i.e. without making a drawing
beforehand, is crucial here, because to bypass the prominent position of the idea – which
is the essence of design (read: disegno) – is a serious attempt to abandon the disregard for
the material and to give it a voice. To be engaged with materials without thinking beforehand
means to drop control and go along with matter.

The second element of the reconfiguration of design concerns the emancipation of intuition
and the change of its nature. According to the humanist theory of design, intuition is bound
to purely spiritual processes and feelings, which are limited to the inner space of the human
body. Makers, however, understand intuition as a reciprocal faculty that is shared with matter,
seeing making as an inimitable interplay of influences.




     Robert Tavornor, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,  (), p. .
     Firenze: Lorenzo Torrentino, .

The third element of reconfiguration is the concept of creativity. According to humanist design
theory, creativity is trapped inside (the space of) the human mind and considered to be the
exclusive agency of all making. By assuming a different metaphysical position, makers can
acknowledge non-human agencies like the active and semi-autonomous answer of matter or
the counter-objection of the tool. In short: by breaking open the humanist subject of creativity,
makers create space for a dual or even triple creativity principle.

Finally, the reconfiguration of design also affects the concept of vision. Through making, this
internally-oriented spiritual faculty that enables the visionary person to see 'things to come',
or 'things to be realized' is transformed into an externally-oriented capacity of observation, be
it connected with sentiency, intuition or fantasy...a real art of observation...with the eye and
the hand...an observation that searches in the appearances of real substances for meaningful
possibilities to continue the event of making...

To conclude: the typical design process follows a set sequence of brain > hands-tools > eyes >
drawing. In making, this series is reconfigured, becoming material > hands-tools > eyes > brain.
These two series characterize the difference between the thinker/drawer with her abstract
planning, and the maker who participates in the material process of making, between the
fixed controller with an overview and the traveling explorer; an open-minded sojourner, ready
to make the most interesting discoveries along the whimsical paths of her journey.

Making and Architectural Practice

Making is easier done in art then in architecture. The artist can dedicate himself to making by
simply skipping the phase of mental concept development and letting the artwork come about
through direct experiments with the material. Architecture is stuck here with a deep division
of labour between the design of a building and its actual construction. Maker-architects have
developed various answers to this problem. Some present themselves as artists and try to
restore the broken link between design and execution. Often they quit architecture, tempo-
rarily or conclusively, and dedicate themselves instead to making as a sculptural exercise.
Others prefer to integrate elements of making in their design processes by paying special
attention to creative modeling and sketching. All recognize in making practices opportunities
to experiment with design methodology.

In architectural schools, making always implies the direct tactile contact with concrete mate-
rials like wood, clay, foam, steel, stone, twigs, etc. For that reason, it is seen as an activity
through which much-needed material knowledge – which designs often lack – is developed.
In addition, the junior architects are highly sensitized to material reality, a reality that for most
of them is troubled by the rising pressure of what might be called real-life surrealism, spread
through the professional world by electronic communication and the use of half-automated
design software such as AutoCAD.


                           (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                          




According to some makers, architectural education should be one big exercise in making. It
should function as a research tool to investigate the way in which architecture manifests itself
through its materials. The architect who integrates an episode of working with materials into
her normally rather abstract design method learns to understand that architecture can very
well have poetic expression through the play of material, space, and light. Students come to
realize that these poetics are the result of the way in which they have organized their working
method and not the outcome of the implementation of such a thing as style, be it historically
or theoretically motivated.

To illustrate what making means in architectural practice, I will describe one of the workshops
that were held around  and represent the first manifestations of the culture of making
in Architecture in the Netherlands. The participants were students of the Academies of
Architecture of Amsterdam and Arnhem.






    by means of active programming was already an activity of blob-architects in the nineties.







Equipped with tools such as measuring tape, construction wire, pickets, and a shovel, student/
makers were asked to work on an empty sand plain near Amsterdam. Nothing had been built
here yet and only the geodetic indications of the plots, a few bridges, and a park could be
seen. The actual material they were assigned to work with was the sand, tangible, visible, and
changeable sand. Though a seemingly monotonous landscape, uneven terrain, tire tracks,
sunken places, and all sorts of other details encouraged exploration.

The students were instructed to look for an inspiring location and start working there. They
had to take into account the topography of the area and the texture of the surface, and were
expected to improve the relationship of these features at the spot they had chosen to devel-
op. They also had to organize their work in a cycle of doing, contemplation, and anticipation,
which had to be repeated several times in each session. It was explicitly forbidden to make
a drawing first. Instead, they were asked to intuitively begin, and then iteratively improve
through a cycle of constant reflection and modification.

The work was carried out in four sessions of half a day. All actions were recorded with pho-
tographs, films, and sketches. Afterwards the experiences were presented at an evaluation
meeting with all participants. Ultimately,  locations were worked. Together they provide
multiple impressions of the sand plain that testify to the potentialities of the sand material
and the topography of sand plain – including the confrontation of the makers with the sun,
the wind, and the water.

The Miracle of Making

The material and the location, which the participants of the workshops of  called poetic
seducers, were crucial factors of inspiration for them. Because the participants stayed as close
as possible to the respective locations during the time the workshops were held, the events
assumed the quality of a retreat, intensifying the focus on material and location. The multiple
cycles of repeated activities they had to go through in a short time minimized the influence
of theoretical considerations. Short working periods of three to four hours created the need
to hurry in order to get results, leaving no time for thinking. Working in groups subsequently
compensated the reduced capacity for production and improved the perception of the mate-
rial and the situation due to the verbal and non-verbal consultations by the group members.

Each workshop ran according to a cycle of assignment, execution, and presentation. Doc-
umentation of the process with photos, film recordings, and sketches created a mode of
perception that was mediated by multiple information carriers. It sharpened gaze and thought,
and created a productive distance that helped to keep the overview. By repeating the cycle,
skills were developed and a proficiency emerged regarding the different working methods.
Through all these features of the process, the makers gained a rich knowledge of the poten-
tialities of the location and the materials.

The participants were not allowed to seek guidance in scientific knowledge, be it of a technical
or an architectural historical nature. No one was allowed to start working with a final image in
mind. The purpose of this was to learn to accommodate the unforeseen, whether it came from

the material or from the location or the circumstances, and to develop the ability to respond
by improvisation. In fact, the participants discovered that the resistance of the material against
its treatment quickly subverted any pre-planned idea. In the end, the workshops promoted
the insight that the final outcome was not controlled by the human mind. The result did not
derive from an idea beforehand, but from an unconditioned interplay of hands, eyes, brains,
materials, and tools, where ideas only could pop up and play a role from the sidelines, insofar
as they were connected to the action in the moment.

In a mysterious way the interplay of the material, the location, the hands and brains, the
contemplative perception, the interim (re)presentation and reflection – all these depend on
the working method. Complicating the working structure through repeated cycles – which
could, in principle, be continued indefinitely – often provided a surprising result, a result that
struck makers with amazement, as if they had contributed to the creation of a miracle. Why?
Because they had outsourced the subject of initiative, the 'creative spirit' to the assemblage
of making, to a set of physical connections in action, to a true 'dance' of the agencies of
materials, locations, tools, and human hands, eyes, and brains.

The Integration of Making in the Classical Design Process

So far we have discussed making as being engaged with materials, putting the creative spirit
aside and aiming for the production of miracles through complex working procedures. In
spite of its different configuration, making can be integrated into the classical design process
by including special phases dedicated to creative model building and sketching. Using delib-
erately vague instructions, some architects ask their employees to produce a large quantity
of models made of styrofoam, clay, or wood – the most appealing of which are selected to
serve as inspiration for the actual design. Others collect readymades in nature and use them
as inspirational models for their design (demonstration models of classical designers, makers improvise more, and use organic models
in order to play off the intrinsic expression of the materials against the imagined forms of their
traditional opponents. For instance, in their architectural models for an apartment in Pratteln,
Switzerland, the architects of Christ und Gantenbein used a pile of irregularly sawn pieces of
wood that could hardly be distinguished from firewood for the stove.

As for sketching, architects are looking for ways of drawing that can be regarded as manual
work, working a material until it amazes the drawer. In his Notebooks, the painter and Bau-
haus professor Paul Klee () defined the line as material, noting that a sketch drawn
by hand is not so much a mental projection as the trace of a movement. More materialistic
still is the following thesis: the lines of a sketch launch themselves from the pencil where they
originate, recording their own sinuous path in the wake of the drafter’s moving hand. In short,
every line drawn by hand is material by nature, because every line is the trace of a gesture.



                             (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                              




Wim Nijenhuis).

In architectural practice, we can distinguish two types of lines: expressive (or gestural) lines
and non-expressive lines. They can be distinguished on the basis of their intention. The
purpose of expressive lines is to express the movements from which they originate, while
in the non-expressive lines expression is an accidental side effect. Non-expressive lines
form technical drawings, mere propositions about what needs to be made. Expressive lines
exceed proposition because of their explicit determination by physical gestures. In other
words, their state of 'being made' is more significant than their capacity for representation.
What these lines share with the material of making is their ambiguity and ability to indicate
paths that the maker can follow. That is why sketches require careful observation, one
tailored to their specific appearance.

The sketch is of great importance for architects in developing ideas. It can only amaze the
drawer, however, when she no longer regards the hand that draws as the obliging implement
of the projective mind, but as an active and disobedient organ that cooperates with other
organs such as the eyes and the brain. She may not longer conceive the brain as the origin of
the initiative, but as the organ of following, perceiving and inner projection. What is surprising
is how quickly – after the activity of the hand has created the play of lines on the paper – the



mental representation arises through seeing it. John Berger () nicely summarizes this
dialectic between external and internal reality: 'Every line that I draw changes the figure on
paper, and at the same time, the figure is traced in my mind as a result'.

Just like the event of making, impulses from outside – visual, tactile, muscular, or physical
impressions, or even just vague feelings – inspire the sketch, because the drawing hand
converts all these sources into a set of lines. In order to do justice to this conversion, the
Finnish architect Juhani Pallasmaa explicitly situates the creative principle of the sketch in
the dynamic assemblage, in the very act of drawing itself. To him it seems 'as if the drawing
draws itself and uses the human hand as its instrument [...] Often it is the drawing itself, the
intense involvement in an "unconscious" act that causes an image or an idea to arise'. Pulling
lines is like working materials because ideas are merely pulled out, or pulled up from the play
of lines as if it were a play of materials. Some architects say that in sketching, the hand that
draws 'feels' the forms to come. The drawing hand as a haptic, amazing 'trigger' of ideas is
making culture's retort to the always-controlled hand of humanism, the mechanical slave
that merely implements the ideas of the mind.

Anthropological Repercussions

Architects may turn to making with the expectation to develop new forms, but as we've seen,
making also implies anthropology, another definition of man. Makers question the humanistic
thesis that our intellectual faculties such as thinking, speech, and technology determine our
humanity, replacing it with a more physical, materialistic, and non-anthropocentric vision.

What are these anthropological repercussions? Does this shift entail that makers make them-
selves when they make things? Theorists and practitioners say yes and distinguish between
two types of making: the formation of character and the improvement of physiological aspects.
Through making, the maker acquires specific skills, but also develops character traits: enthu-
siasm, observational attitude, familiarity with uncertainty, an ability to improvise, self-discipline,
self-confidence, and humility. On the physical side making improves body parts like the hands
and brain – or at least saves them from further regression.

Typical for making is its energy-generating effect. The German art historian Oliver Zybok relates
this energy to the obsessive person, who is 'extremely focused on something and shows an
excessive energy that is spent on one specific interest'. Here, the negative characteristics
of this syndrome – the emotionally charged field of tension and the additional, often unpro-
ductive urge for perfection – are restrained by the 'steady rhythm for work' of the maker and
her focus on 'concrete objects and procedures'. Thanks to the self-discipline acquired by
the nature of her activity, the maker succeeds in transforming her enthusiasm into a fruitful




and healthy variant that Richard Sennett has labelled constructive obsession. Because of
this self-discipline, obsession loses its pathological traits and becomes enjoyable. Construc-
tive obsession, self-control, and pleasure become character traits of the maker, because a
well-defined working process allows her to escape from herself.

Secondly, making encourages the acceptance of imperfection, pushing us to go along
with accidental slip-ups and failures, or better yet, to perceive them as salutary. To
make this happen, the maker needs to recognize that slip-ups point the way to a free
and personal attitude towards the basically unbeatable quality standards and paragons
of perfection that are imposed on us today by the industrial production and the circula-
tion of electronic images. Making helps us avoid the depression that often results from
slavishly following the paragons of visual culture, teaching the maker to rely more on
herself. The lesson of salutary failure is: 'Discover your own way; innovate, don't imitate!'

These character traits have their origin in working materials. That is why making also
has repercussions on human physiology. It is clear that, through working materials,
we train the hand. In doing so we improve proficiencies, proficiencies comprised of
individual expression. Do we not say 'the master's hand'? Faced with the continuing
regression of the hand and the loss of its expressiveness caused by the degradation
of the fingers when operating the computer mouse, working materials restores some
qualities the hand possessed in the past when it was still a highly sensitive organ with
spiritual repercussions. French anthropologist Leroi-Gourhan put it this way: 'that we
don't have to "think with our fingers" is equal to the lack of a part of someone's normal
phylogenetic human mind'.

In his book about the craftsman, Richard Sennett concludes that anyone who has
learned from working with materials to be patient, to control herself, to observe the mate-
rials sentience, and to move with them, also has the skill to avoid the counterproductive
use of reckless and brutal violence in daily life. Working with materials enables people
to govern themselves and so become good citizens.

Ethical Practice

Being good is an ethical matter. Our culture understands ethics as something close to
morals, i.e. a set of rules that tells us what to do and not to do in daily life. We experience
morals often as restrictions. Character also determines behavior. However, its mecha-
nism is not prohibition but building a set of habits, of fixed behavioral patterns that we
internalize through constant repetition over a longer period. We know this mechanism


from sports. It teaches us that people can become dedicated to repetition because it is
immediately rewarding. When the maker experiences an improvement in performance, she
is drawn into the steady training scheme that is needed to acquire skills and to change habits.

In his popular masterpiece You Must Change Your Life, the German philosopher Peter Sloterdi-
jk highlights this mechanism, calling it 'anthropotechnics', techniques of individual and collec-
tive self-transformation. Making is anthropotechnic because it is rooted in the convergence
of manufacturing and practicing. Making is tantamount to the acceptance of learning through
repeated physical exertion, including its slow pace enforced by working materials. Going a step
further then Sennett, Sloterdijk proclaims that through techniques such as targeted training,
(relative) isolation – be it alone or together with others – and Bildung (spiritual education),
we can develop our own, preferably socially deviating, way to a superior performance that is
determined by ourselves, including our bodies.

Sloterdijk sees an opportunity here to promote the formation of alternative personalities, people
who are willing to acquire good habits like care for the environment or extend courtesy towards
their fellow human beings. Since the Enlightenment, we consider personality to depend on
an inner regime that consists of a combination of innate and learned ways of responding
and acting. We now understand that the maker – through the conscious repetition of certain
activities and developing self-discipline by working materials – also acts upon her own inner
regime of behavior. When she changes her existing regime (e.g. sitting in front of a computer,
or watching television, or hurriedly acting) through making, she changes her personality in
an active way. Making is then a means of personality transformation: by working materials,
the maker remakes herself.

Being a good citizen means having good habits. Good habits presuppose that humans have
a certain degree of control over their affections and passions. This 'ability to govern yourself'
can help to make a stand against being governed by the many subliminal effects of advertising
on classical and social media. Making can help you to become a consciously trained world
citizen, fit to face the disasters of the Anthropocene.

Becoming a good person through training, however, requires a new understanding of ethics.
The link between character formation and mental-physical training is an unjustly forgotten
dimension of ancient Greek ethics that we need to rediscover. The philosopher Aristotle argued
that 'excellence of character (èthikè) is the result of habit (ethous)'. In his statement, he
plays with variations of the word èthos and connects them with related terms like character
and personality. It follows that doing good is being excellent and being excellent is only
possible because of good habits. In order to develop good habits now, it is necessary that
reason persuades the irrational part of the soul and makes it obey. This mechanism, which




I referred to above as 'governing yourself', can only become a character trait by training. As
a result, the ancient Greeks understood èthos (ethics) as a set of practices meant to develop
good habits, but also more broadly as a capacity for action and a moral resilience. The result
of these practices is the excellent and good personality that – we would say today – knows
how to take care of nature and how to be polite to fellow humans.

The Latin concept for good and excellent behavior is habitus. Etymologically it derives from
 hab ēre: 'having' – hence 'habit' also for something annoying yet fixed – and the frequentative
 habitare or 'dwelling'. In various modern languages, there is an intrinsic connection between
'dwelling' (to habit; habiter), 'habitude' or 'habit' (French: habitude and habitudes: 'tradition,
 morals'). Along this path, too, we arrive at a point where the practice-based transformation
 of habits – until they have become part of our character – is an ethic. This ethic, however,
 sincerely differs from obeying tables of rules that are prepared by others. In the first place, it
 is an activity, a training scheme, hence the expression: ethical practice.

Spaan, Machiel and Jan Peter Wingender. The Temporary Expert, Amsterdam: Academy of Architec-
ture and Arnhem: ArtEZ Academy of Architecture and Wingender Hovenier Architecten, .
Vasari, Giorgio. The Lives of the Artists, trans. Julia Condaway Bondanella and Peter Bondanella,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, . Or. (It.): Le Vite de' Più Eccellenti Pittori, Scultori e Architettori,
Firenze: Lorenzo Torrentino, .
Zybok, Oliver. 'Lust und Zwang der Obsession; Betrachtungen in Kunst und Gesellschaft' [Pleasure
and compulsion of the obsession; Reflections in art and society] in: 'Obsessionen' [Obsessions],
Kunstforum International, Bd  März-April,  (German only).

        Back to the
      Basics: Or Why
         [Design]
       Education Is
      Going Back to
          Making

       Serena Cangiano
                            (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                            




          BACK TO THE BASICS: OR WHY [DESIGN]
          EDUCATION IS GOING BACK TO MAKING

                                     SERENA CANGIANO

In the last few years, design has experienced what might be termed a crisis of cross-pollination.
Driven by innovation at any cost, design education and the broader design community have
been spliced into every facet of business, creating a storm of multidisciplinarity, interdiscipli-
narity, and most recently anti-disciplinarity. The worldwide adoption of design thinking and all
its derivative companions, from open innovation methods to circular design canvases, have
steered designers into a transition in which their practice has been lifted from design craft to
the more intellectualized realm of effective problem-solving strategies.

Design has gone beyond the practice of merely crafting an object, a graphic, or a wooden stool.
Today, it seems that design is finally free. Light and intangible, it has become a material-free
discipline. Furthermore, due to the growing interests of companies to obtain the status of
design-led organizations, design has been forced to release its inner code, reencoding itself
into highly reproducible, step-by step formulas. Essentially, design is making itself accessible
to the masses as it did during the first and second industrial revolution. Although intangible,
design remained reproducible, fulfilling the needs of different contexts such as business
schools or the third sector of non-profit organizations.

Design is no longer related to making things. But while we all agree this has been a great
achievement, a sense of discomfort is growing towards this new status within the community.,,
Can we claim that the 'post-post-it age' has officially started? Or, thanks to the expressive
opportunity offered by technology, are we witnessing instead the beginning of a sort of digital
renaissance in which designers stand up for their rights and manifest their will to go back
to the basics of making and creating things? In this article I explain the practical correlation
between design and creation through personal reflections of design and design education.
These reflections come from ten years experience designing hands-on workshops and master
courses, where prototyping with code and hardware was the main teaching method. I will dis-
cuss the idea of value and the return to making in design through historical and contemporary
case studies. These examples allow us to speculate what a learning toolkit of the post-post-it
age might look like. It will probably not feature canvases or user journey maps, but instead
focus on basic design exercises. Exercises like these might help everyone – not just design
students – to make things that move, think, communicate, sense, see, compute or augment.



    , https://www.fastcodesign.com//design-thinking-is-a-failed-experiment-so-whats-next.

Antiprimadonna is one of the basic design exercises created by Thomas Maldonado, designer,
design theorist, and revolutionary lecturer at Ulm Hochschule für Gestaltung. The exercise
requires design students to place seven drawings on a vertical rectangle measuring  x 
centimeters and divided into seven columns. Five drawings should be full color, while two
drawings should be black and white only, black lines, white dots, and so on. The goal is to
avoid having any one drawing that achieves visual supremacy; none of them should dom-
inate the others. This exercise teaches students how to define perceptive hierarchies and
how to guide the viewer's eye to what is important. Antiprimadonna is a propaedeutic activity,
it is about learning design before designing. Together with other basic design experiences,
this toolkit allows students to develop a codified system of design principles. Such learning
is highly embodied, generated through a practical activity that implies conversations and
reflections, a praxis.

Let's time travel from the s to the s. In  I attended my first Arduino workshop
at iA in Switzerland, the summer venue of the Los Angeles based architecture school SciArc.
The workshop tutor was a member of the Swiss Mechatronic Art Society. During that work-
shop I had the chance to learn one of the basic principles of digital electronics prototyping:
how to control a light emitting diode (LED) with a light sensor. By writing a few lines of code,
I could control when the diode light was on or off and I could set a delay to make it blink or
react to the value coming from a light sensor. Thanks to this first step into Arduino code, I
realized that programming the LED blink rate or brightness were both basic design exercises
that taught the fundamentals of interactivity. These exercises dealt with core elements such
as input and output, interface and feedback. Since the time of that workshop, and even after
ten years of developing hands-on tech workshops for designers and artists, I have to admit
my technical skills have not really advanced. But more importantly, my understanding of how
to design interactive systems in a context of constant technological change is solid. Through
the simple configuration of the shape and color of a light, these exercises illustrate how design
education uses making activities as a way of accessing and creating abstract knowledge.

Designers Under Pressure

We live in an age of resource scarcity. Design as merely the configuration of forms (Italian
translation of Gestaltung) will not be enough to face today's big challenges and save the world.
Design as a prospective act or a plan (the English language meaning of design) can instead
enable designers to focus on processes rather than results in order to face the complexity of
our times. Rather than designing 'products', we need to finally celebrate designing 'for a pur-
pose'. Here, design becomes reframed. As design research duo Elizabeth Sanders and Pieter


      giovannianceschiteoria/docs/.-basic-design-fondamenta.



Jan Stappers assert, visual communication becomes design for experiencing, interior
design become design for emotions, urban design become design for transformation, and
so on. In this transformation process, theorist Arturo Escobar highlights that designers
are asked to stop making crap and start designing for the pluriverse, considering not
only human factors but also the entire living ecosystem. Paola Antonelli asks designers
to design an elegant end of the world and new fictional scenarios that help humanity to
reflect on and anticipate the future.

Designers are under pressure. Society is urging them to use user-centered methods
for development or transformation strategies. Industry is demanding that they become
new innovation leaders. Policy makers are badgering them to prototype large scale
changes. For a decade, the design community has constantly been under pressure to
achieve the right kind of scientific acknowledgement. It no longer sounds strange when
John Maeda, the American technologist and manager at the digital firm Autommattic,
stated that designers have become so important that they now need to step back. Fol-
lowing these pressures, design education has had to adapt, abandoning basic design
exercises and developing new ways to transfer new design knowledge. User journey
maps, scenarios, personas, ethnographic research, and design fiction stories are the
tools that help young students to operate in this complex world, to learn how to think
user centered and community centered, to convince companies of the value of design
beyond form, function, and aesthetics. Yet despite all of this disciplinary (re)evolution,
technology seems strangely relegated to the borders. Technology and design have long
been in conversation, but oddly, when it comes to the education context, technology
has been completely underutilized.

The Contribution of the Maker Movement and FabLabs

From  onwards, maker movement's influences started entering design schools
through the backdoor. 'Everyone is a maker' is its motto, and DIY and open source
hardware is its tool to change the world, from manufacturing to innovation. The maker
movement once again ennobled the act of building things and the domain of physical
goods production. It celebrated the use of hardware and software technology as a means
of empowerment by opening the exclusive domain of the model-makers to everyone. With
its Arduino boards and D printers, the maker movement started pollinating all education
sectors and levels. From elementary schools to universities, the maker movement placed
prototyping and making at the center of every possible learning experience.




Along with the maker movement, another key initiative contributed to education's return to
making: FabLabs. This global network of fabrication labs reinvigorated learning by doing,
replacing the dusty model-making labs of design schools with shiny digital fabrication
machines and open knowledge platforms. Both the maker movement and the FabLabs
network augmented the practice of making things by adding the technological layer and
by facilitating the return to craft in the context of a digital renaissance. Key within this
process is the ability of web platforms to distribute open resources. From web tutorials
and programs to open sourcing the means of production, online openness made digital
making accessible and affordable to everyone. It enabled a new generation of creative
coders, machine inventors, and designers to rediscover the value of making as an effec-
tive way of learning and expression. Openness is the difference between the makers and
designers of our time and their grandmas and grandpas at Ulm. Making as empowering
reinforced this difference – suddenly anyone, regardless of educational background, could
learn how to develop a product and a device.

Technology Education for Designers and Creatives

There were moments between  and  when I truly believed that – in Europe at
least – the narrative of makers and FabLabs had completely replaced the narrative of
designers. Participatory design, co-design, sustainable design, interaction design, design
for manufacturing – all these fields became absorbed by the maker revolution, assimilated
in its unstoppable rise. The revolution remixed them, making them understandable to the
families, kids, teachers, CEOs and marketing managers who visited Maker Faires all around
the globe. At that time, events, academic conferences, panels, and doctoral dissertations
were all populated by discussions about what makers do, where they intervene, what their
skills are, and how their work might engage with the competencies and perspectives of
designers. In this comparison, makers were always the ones bringing openness, disci-
plinary inclusion, and more importantly, a high level of technological awareness that their
polytechnic intellectual cousins, the designers, had long tried to leave behind in their
pursuit of strategic positions. It was a period when both elite design universities and small
design schools began working on models to introduce digital making into their curricula,
catering to students who were starving for technological knowledge.

While design education tried to renovate itself by reintroducing making (or totally refusing
it), design students were populating Makerspaces and FabLabs or enrolling at new pro-
grams that managed to integrate the technological factor into the creative process. The
School of Machines, Making and Make-Believe is an initiative founded in Berlin in 
by Rachel Uwa. Their mission is to reimagine education through hands-on learning pro-
grams combining art, design, and technology. In the last four years, the School of MAA
has run hands-on workshops on the Internet of Things, machine learning, and an array
of other technical subjects that should matter to the st century designer. More than a
school, the initiative can be considered an artwork or a prototype of what design (and art)
education could become if the separation among disciplines would finally be overcome.





At the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic, Zachary Lieberman, a designer and
developer based in New York, poured his time into establishing the School for Poetic
Computation (SFPC), a six week program on design and technology for artists and design-
ers. At SFPC, students may be asked to code old analog designs alongside art pieces.
As in the Renaissance period, their training is based on the observation and replication of
masterpieces, but with the application of coding as a humanistic technique. In the south
of Italy, La Scuola Open Source provides a hackerspace format that combines the typical
maker education offer (i.e. courses on laser cutting, CNC milling, Arduino) with classes
on computational typography or co-design. All these independent schools try to integrate
design and technology into a practice-based education in which making and coding are
not just new brushes but a new way of thinking. While none are perfect, they nevertheless
function as prototypes for critically discussing why and how design education should not
refuse the technological factor. Rather than making as nostalgia, they see making as the
only way to overcome disciplinary pigeonholing, a way to develop multiple competencies
and move education towards something new.

Why 'Back to Making' does not mean Back to Chairs

In the field of STEM and maker education, educators and researchers focus on the oppor-
tunity to develop key st century skills like creativity and complex problem solving rather
than just digital literacy. FabLabs and Makerspaces, with their low-cost and easy to
use soft-hard prototyping tools, empower educators to implement constructivist learning
environments in which they act as facilitators of personalized and collaborative learning
experiences. Within this context, it emerges that digital making – a diverse range of activi-
ties through which students learn by making an end product with a technical and creative
approach – can become a way of improving education. By creating a real solution to a
real problem, students become engaged in a more immersive learning experience. Within
education, making goes beyond making, becoming a strategy to train people to become
active, responsible, and engaged citizens rather than skilled software developers.

This accent on a holistic pedagogy with making and critical thinking at its heart is not far
from ideas generated in historical design experiments. Between  and , a collec-
tive of artists, designers, and architects that included Ettore Sottsass founded Global Tools
in Italy. This multidisciplinary program aimed at deconstructing education, striving to free
the individual's creativity from every kind of cultural, social, and technological constraint.
The magazine Casabella, directed by Alessandro Mendini at the time, spread the ideas
and educational formats that were ideated by the collective. Mostly they promoted a return



to the authenticity of manual work. According to Global Tools, education had to stimulate
an awareness of the structure of society and in particular, society's use of the education
system to perpetuate constraints on individuals.

Fascinated by autarchy and materials, the Global Tools program included several research
tracks such as the Construction track theorized by Andrea Branzi. In one note describing
the laboratory, Branzi talks about the use of a 'simple technology' as a way of zeroing in on
the artificiality and the intrinsic perspective of every tool. For Branzi, simple technology is
material that has been purified of the cultural baggage and predefined concepts that are
normally attached to technologies. Situated in Branzi's broader pedagogy, simple technology
was an expression of radical thinking in education. Unfortunately, the radical thinking of
Global Tools failed after two years of experiments. However, I believe that the concept of
simple technology is somehow reenacted in the current practices of digital making, open
hardware, and design applied in education. In this context, simple technologies are the
open codes, electronics and designs that work as materials to make almost anything with-
out any disciplinary barrier and with a critical perspective. The simple open technologies of
digital making-based education empower students to be in control rather than be controlled.
Instead of being taught to create another chair, students are taught the mindsets and skills
necessary to face the vast societal challenges of today.

Like the designers and artists of Global Tools in the seventies, we too are living in a period of
dominant power, yet one that takes the form of a digital panopticon able to shape people's
behaviors and lives. As a consequence, the return to making (with a digital perspective)
is no longer a nostalgic action, but a survival strategy. How can we design for a contem-
porary context if we do not understand how its main material operates? To design for this
context, we must learn how to decode and deconstruct the power embedded in everyday
technologies. To do so, we must step through a basic process of making that enables us to
critically decide how we want our contemporaneity to be built. From this perspective, the
return to making in education does not mean stripping out complexity and reducing the
role of thinking in the design process. Instead, it suggests that schools are prototypes to
validate – before releasing the final solution – the possible ways to contribute to any societal
change. Within these prototypes, students should be exposed to updated 'libraries of simple
open technologies'. By removing the filters imposed by the private titans of the technological
sector, such libraries would enable students to critically include their own perspective as
responsible and engaged citizens.

In a 'post-post-it' society, I wonder what the ultimate design toolkit to train the st century
designer could be. Rather than the usual canvases or user journey maps, this toolkit would
feature a set of basic design exercises that help everyone, not only design students, to make
things that move, think, communicate, sense, see, compute or augment. These exercises
would help students to control technology, to assertively own it as a material, a tool, and a
key factor influencing society today.






(eds) st Century Skills: Rethinking How Students Learn, Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree Press
Iskander, Natasha. 'Design Thinking Is Fundamentally Conservative and Preserves the Status Quo',
Harvard Business Review,  September , https://hbr.org///design-thinking-is-fundamen-
tally-conservative-and-preserves-the-status-quo.
Jen, Natasha. Natasha Jen: Design Thinking is Bullshit, U Conference  on Vimeo.com, August
, https://vimeo.com/.
Maeda, John. 'In Reality, Design Is Not That Important', FastCompany,  March , https://www.
fastcompany.com//john-maeda-in-reality-design-is-not-that-important.
Nussbaum, Bruce. 'Design Thinking Is A Failed Experiment. So What's Next?', FastCompany,  April
, https://www.fastcodesign.com//design-thinking-is-a-failed-experiment-so-whats-next.
Sanders, Elizabeth and Pieter Jan Stappers. 'Co-Creation and the Landscape of Design', CoDesign :
School of Machines, Making and Make-Believe, www.schoolofma.org.
School for Poetic Computation, www.sfpc.io.
SciArc, Southern California Institute of Architecture, www.sciarc.edu.
Swiss Mechatronics Art Society, www.sgmk.ch

   Learning the
  Washing Machine

      Samantha Penn
                            (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                               




                 LEARNING THE WASHING MACHINE
                                      SAMANTHA PENN

This text documents the practice-led research project Learning the Washing Machine, which
investigates what can be learned about machines and culture from working with home appli-
ances, specifically washing machines. Our relationship with our washing machine housemates
is intimate, but the way we talk, think about, and interact with them is restricted by a variety of
interconnected structures. Years in the making and involving varying extents of monopolization
or diversity, these structures are built by humans and machines together, and maintain morals,
success, knowledge and identity to materials, machines and systems of symbols. The project is
an attempt to 'learn washing machines', and in the process to work out what it means to do so.

This project was developed as a continuation of discussions around computation and culture
that myself and other project collaborators had while undertaking the MA in Digital Culture
at Goldsmiths University's Centre for Cultural Studies. It is particularly influenced by the work
of YoHa, whose work contributes to the growing field of Critical Technical Practice, originally
coined by Phil Agre.

The workshops documented here explore one or a small number of processes, stories, activities,
or other threads linked to washing machines by exploring a process of group laundry, dismantling
washing machines, studying and remaking wash cycles, and tracing water system timelines.
They look at what washing machines do and have done, how they came to exist, and the larger
and smaller scale (social) cycles and routines they are part of.

Group Laundry

In this workshop a large group of people split into two smaller groups to do laundry. Each group
washed clothes while observing the apparatus, discussing the processes they were using, and
making decisions as a group about the laundry. One group used a washing machine and deter-
gent. The other used a bowl and handwashing soap, washing clothes by hand.

The workshop was informed by age-old community laundry practices. Formal records exist from
the s (though the practice has existed for much longer), documenting areas of grass, bushes,
or built structures set aside for the communal drying of clothes, and the practice of washing
clothes in groups by the river. Both groups remarked that washing is something they usually
do alone. Washing today usually is solitary. We discussed the implications of today’s practice
of washing in solitude, isolated from others and isolated from an understanding of washing
machines and the washing machine industry. How does this solitude affect the way people think
about self, community, engineering, and industry?



 



 




The group working with the washing machine noted that the settings on the machine
suggested materials to work with (wool, delicates), and wondered how the settings had
been chosen. In the discussion following the workshop, we talked about the relationship
between washing and data. Market researchers interview people about their laundry habits,
and these responses inform the marketing and distribution of detergents, as well as the
design and engineering of laundry-related products.

Workshop participants reported being unaccustomed to thinking about laundry as a pro-
cess, or to linking it to science or engineering. People also reported being more aware of
their bodies and of actions and decisions than they usually would when washing. Washing
in a workshop format brought up previously unarticulated associations with work, study,
and public events, and awareness of different people's washing routines. The groups came
up with strategies for washing in response to the unusual situation they were working
in. For instance, one group combined handwashing with a ball game to throw balled-up
socks into water. Another group stood around the washing machine and watched each
other demonstrate how they put their washing into the machine – after this quick review
of techniques, the group collectively chose one to continue with.

Laundry tends to be placed in the realm of a particular kind of work, 'house work', which
is neither linked to science and engineering, nor to study. Responses to the group wash-
ing task reflected this – several people in both groups resented having to 'do work' when
they had expected to 'do a workshop', and some found it difficult or uncomfortable to
think about something usually carried out on 'autopilot' as a workshop. The workshop
also seemed to express something of the way washing machine history has affected
relationships between work and gender – the broadly female group seemed reluctant to
be exploratory with washing routines and worked in a speedy and considered way, while
the broadly male group turned washing into a game, but didn't engage much with the
group analysis and discussion of washing. Exploring practices of doing laundry inevitably
provokes us to consider ideas around domestic labor, which is historically a gendered
one. Of course, this one-off workshop is neither representative nor conclusive; it is a
discussion about laundry carried out while doing laundry. It would be interesting – but
still inconclusive – to repeat the workshop in different contexts in order to understand
how both our relations to washing and washing technologies themselves might be gen-
dered today.

Dismantling the Washing Machine

This activity involved dismantling washing machines. Three groups of people disman-
tled three machines with hand and power tools, looking at and handling the parts,
researching the parts to find out what they did and how they related to one another, and
physically laying them out on the ground. Each of the dismantling sessions was followed
by a discussion. Most of the people who dismantled washing machines had no prior
training in engineering, so we relied on the collective knowledge of the group to find
our own routes into thinking about the machines different components and operations.

, image by Nora Silva.

Broadly speaking, those whose daily life involves working regularly with their hands were
confident, while those unused to working with their hands held back. When asked about this
they said they were intimidated by something they read as unfamiliar, and even dangerous.
Some people were unfamiliar with tools – one person while dismantling a washing machine
said that they didn't know how to hold a spanner – that it felt uncomfortable in, and slipped
from, their hands. Others telling them how to hold the spanner was helpful, but they were still
relatively slow, and therefore held back while other more confident people dismantled most of
the machine. Another person said they didn't know where to start when taking the machine
apart; they didn't know how to think about how the parts fit together or how they could be
taken apart. A third said that they built their sense of identity and success around writing and
working with people, and felt useless and vulnerable with the washing machine. They felt that
it was too late to start to learn how to work with machines. Such responses show that although
the washing machine is a ubiquitous object most people are familiar with through everyday
use, it remains somewhat mysterious. They also show that how a person relates to the washing
machine is heavily linked to the skills, knowledge and experiences they already have, as well
as their relationship to others dismantling the machine.

 Dismantling the washing machine began with touching and looking. We could not hope to
'understand' washing machine parts, but we could indeed touch them, feel their weight, blow





into them, spin them, make visual readings of them, ask questions about them, look them up
in washing machine manuals and watch videos of them working or being repaired.

Washing machines are made of structurally similar, but specifically tailored, components – for
example, the motor which spins the drum and the motor in the pump. Remove one part, and
the machine stops working as planned, since all the other parts rely on it. This is specifically
the case for older machines. With newer machines, however, when a part stops working as
programmed, the cycle continues regardless (resulting in clothes being more soapy or wet
than usual). This makes troubleshooting more difficult, but nevertheless still possible.

Many workshop participants found it challenging to think about how the parts work together.
This was especially the case when it involved reading circuit boards or thinking about the
interaction of components, when not used to doing so. People found the relationship between
the motor and the circuit board, the solenoid valve, and other parts obscure. They reported
difficulty reading the symbols on circuit diagrams, or working out how to research washing
machine parts from serial numbers (when information on a component is found online, ref-
erences to it are usually in technical datasheets or sales listings). The difficulty people had in
approaching datasheets is not surprising given the years it takes to become an engineer, as
well as the general separation of industrial work from housework (something we explored as
part of the LED sequences workshop below). Strategies readily available to anyone without
training – such as feeling and handling the machines' parts, following the routes of wires or
pipes, and looking up manuals and tutorials – were techniques for approaching the washing
machine that somewhat addressed these difficulties. It also helped to take time over the
dismantle, to make a social event of the activity. Group washing has historically had the extra
function of cementing relationships in a community. Group dismantling, like group washing,
demands time and space away from routine spaces and habits in order to stand and scratch
heads, collectively agree on an approach, and pursue it methodically, and can therefore act
in a similar way.

LED Wash Cycles

This activity began with research into the history of washing machines from two angles. The
first explored the history of the mechanisms used to wash clothes (such as washing bats and
beetles, dollies, washboards, hand turned ‘tombola’ style drums, dollies raised and lowered by
a crank, or drums turned by steam engines) as presented by Lee Maxwell and Lel Gretton.
The second angle comprised the history of the development of domestic appliances during
the industrial revolution in the UK and US, specifically their role in redistributing domestic
work, as demonstrated by historian of technology Ruth Schwartz Cowan.


    Hearth To The Microwave, London: Free Association Books, .

image by Eleanor Chownsmith.

This research informed the values attached to the LEDs in sequence. A number of LEDs
arranged in a parallel circuit were programmed to light up for specific durations. For the histor-
ical timeline, one second of illumination represented one century, and each LED represented a
different mechanical means of washing clothes. For the wash cycle timeline, each LED repre-
sented a washing machine component, and one second of illumination represented one minute.

During a series of workshops, the LED cycles were laid out on tables. People taking part could
select and run a washing machine history sequence by completing one of seven LED circuits.
Participants could also make a timeline of their daily wash routine and, if they had time, set
up a circuit of their own.

The story of laundry is complex and largely undocumented. This is perhaps because laundry
was historically done by working people, often women with families – people unlikely to have
read and written or be written about on a regular basis. Today, dynamics are different: wash-
ing machines can be found in the homes of journalists and historians, but historic dynamics
have arranged infrastructures and practices in such a way that washing machines are rarely
mentioned. As such, our understanding of them is based largely on physical interactions.

The way people do laundry is also highly contingent on local knowledge and conditions. Laun-
dry routines involve planning, thought and skill. Doing the washing involves making a great
number of small decisions.




         LED    Represents                               Century        Seconds

                                 scrubbing devices
                Motorised dolly, pounding plunger,
         
      
There is a great variety of uses of laundry baskets, approaches to collars and cuffs,
approaches to hanging and drying clothes and spaces and conditions appropriate to do
so, and ways to add detergents to washing machines. There are also a variety of ways
in which machine manufacturers name their wash cycles (what the chosen names say
about washing machines and how they are made is a pressing question and warrants
further research).

The LED sequences communicated aspects of the particular relationship between wash-
 ing machines/laundry and time.Throughout its history, laundry has involved alternation
 between the focused and frenetic human-led activity of washing, and pregnant pauses
– periods of waiting for important processes such as drying or soaking to take place.
 In recent decades, electrical washing machines have contained most of this activity
 inside a box. This doesn't mean that the durational character of doing the laundry is
 hidden; it is just arranged differently. The durational character of washing machines is
 evident in the motor spins and pauses between them, in the click of the door interlock
 mechanism, and in the gradual turn of a dial or the flashing of LED lights. During the
 LED sequencing workshops, participants had to wait for each LED to light up, marking
 a significant point in the history of washing machines. Sometimes a light would stay on
 for  or  seconds. The experience of waiting to read the history of washing machines
 in lights echoes that of waiting for a cycle to finish. It is also important to note that the
 LED lights on a washing machine are one of the signals – beside listening and checking
 the door – that people often refer to when making sure the wash sequence has ended.
 (Question for a future workshop: how would people relate to a washing machine history
 made with motors or valves?)

To make a history in lights necessitates deciding on a limited number of historical events
to allocate lights to. Using LEDs to represent historical patterns truncates the compli-
cated story of washing machines. This is problematic from a historian's perspective, as
selecting a small number of historical events or markers erases countless others. It is
less problematic from a washing machine learner's perspective, as the replacement of
detail with representative markers has similarities with the way the washing machine

chip is programmed. These are some of the insights we had when talking about the LED
history sequences. The story of washing machines is bound up with the story of motors,
drums, valves, suspension systems, and programmer chips.


      //washing_machine_cycle (LEDs represent parts of wash-
      ing machine.
      //Duration LED is lit roughly represents duration part
      is working)

      //LED      //LED      //LED
      void Sequence(){

          digitalWrite(LED, HIGH);
          digitalWrite(LED, HIGH);

          //thermostat tests water – hot enough? N
          digitalWrite(LED, HIGH);
          delay();
          digitalWrite(LED, LOW);
          delay();

          //heating element on
          digitalWrite(LED, HIGH);

          //thermostat tests water – hot enough? N
          digitalWrite(LED, HIGH);
          delay();
          digitalWrite(LED, LOW);
          delay();


          [...]



                             (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                         







Water System Timeline

For this activity, students and staff at Goldsmiths (University of London) built a network of pipes
which was also a timeline communicating washing machine history. The pipes were copper sol-
dered mm and mm plumbing pipes, plus one mm MDPE pipe, fed via a four-gallon cold
water tank typically used to feed a central heating system and to condense and collect excess
steam. A washing machine water pump was used to keep water flowing around the system.

As with the LED sequence timeline, this timeline articulates the washing machine as a networked
machine. The copper and plastic pipes used to make the timeline are standard in UK domestic
plumbing; the copper pipes supply water, while the plastic pipes carry away waste water. In most
homes in the UK, the washing machine is connected (via washing machines valves and pipe
connectors) to these pipes, which in turn are connected to the mains pipelines that connect
towns and cities with reservoirs, sewers, and water treatment plants. The history of these pipes
is woven into the history of cities and towns. Pipes, tanks, and radiators are the most recent in
long, tangled lines of components and systems designed over thousands of years to contain and
distribute water, to deliver water to homes and workplaces, to remove waste water, to put out fires,
to manage building temperatures, and to keep dirty and clean water separate. Plumbing systems
in the home have been refined over centuries, (a good example is the history of the boiler and the
various safety and fuel-reuse measures added over the years), yet some of the skills and practices
carried out by plumbers today echo those carried out thousands of years ago. Soldering copper
pipes, the use of controlled sources of gas to heat water, and gravity-fed plumbing systems have
existed in some form or other for millennia. By incorporating parts from domestic plumbing
systems, this timeline made from pipes – as with the LED sequences – references some of the


components that activate washing machines and laundry activity, thus building links between
the components and the history of laundry. The hands-on activity of collaboratively building
the system also communicates washing machine history and identity. Here, the hands-on
work of the plumber and the laundress are connected at the point where water leaves the
pipes and starts to fill the washing machine.

As much as the existence of washing machines provide a baseline for the cleanliness and
effort we expect in relation to laundry, plumbing systems provide markers of expectation
linked to water provision, cleaning and storage. A water pipe leaking in the home is distressing
because it threatens many of the security systems we build around ourselves, raising red flags
around hygiene, the structural stability of the materials homes are made from, money, and
the entry of a stranger into the home. A plumbing emergency reminds many homeowners
of their lack of practical ability, and by extension, their vulnerability in a crisis. Plumbing
systems are part of infrastructures contributing to longer lives and lower disease rates. They
are usually reliable and in many ways make life simpler. They are also a way for governing
bodies to maintain and exert power - through allocation and withdrawal of water maintenance,
through the establishment of standards of hygiene and technical complexity attainable only
to some, through the construction of rigid physical boundaries, structures that both keep us
safe and trap us in rituals.

One of the reasons plumbing, laundry, and washing machines have been little written about
is that writing isn't particularly useful in these areas. The only way to learn the 'language' of
water systems or electrical systems or mechanical systems is to be within them, to work within
them. It is interesting that the way many washing-machine-housemates and even more so
computer-housemates interact with their machines in the UK is via a narrow group of repet-
itive actions involving buttons, cable connections and switches, whereas simultaneously, the
physical footprint of these machines is so massive, involving digging up of land, the efforts of
thousands of people, the pressure of gallons of water, and so on.

Conflations, Separations, Restrictions, Agitations

Washing machines agitate clothes, conflating soap, dirt, fabric, and hot water, separating
clean and dirty water, and types of fabric. These conflations and separations are linked to
the production of other conflations and separations outside the washing machine drum. For
example, the processes which led to the arrival of the washing machine motor are linked – via
the Industrial Revolution – to the process of separating the house-bond (husband) from
the house-wife, separating the home from industry, and separating people into two genders
whose actions are restricted by complicated regulatory systems. Another example: the man-
ufacture of copper wire or copper pipes is connected to the Industrial Revolution and to
colonial practices of consolidating power by moving difficult, dangerous, and scarring work
from one country to another. Similar regulatory systems evolved separating the word 'work'
along various lines; work as a social phenomenon is separated from work as a physical one.
Work as a social phenomenon is further fragmented in numerous ways. Construction work,





office work, academic work, and house work is one fragmentation framework that evolved
due to physical separations and logistics. Another framework separates thought from action.
Another separates science, engineering and culture. Another separates digital from analogue.
Washing machines connect these fragmentations, but we are not used to thinking about the
fragmentations through washing machines.

•   Here are some examples of the separations and conflations whose existence the washing
    machine project has so far indicated:
•   Housework is disconnected from industry/engineering/science, despite the two
    having co-evolved.
•   Through industrialization, bureaucratization, and computation, people are separated
    along lines of gender and class.
•   The concept of work is often separated from the concept of learning (hence the repeated
    question 'why are we doing a workshop on washing machines?').
•   Machines and their industrial production are separated from, and thus infrequently
    recognized as part of, 'the cultural' and 'the social'.
•   The concept of knowledge is disconnected from housework.
•   Systems developed away from the home, in factories, are infrequently mentioned in the
    home despite their daily presence within it.
•   Housework evolved to integrate home appliances, but is not concerned with repairing
    them or understanding how they work. These problems were historically, and still are,
    dealt with in factories and by occasionally-visiting engineers.
•   If domestic appliances (which replaced servants) do not work properly, a family loses a
    resource important to harmonious survival, therefore risking decline in social status, and
    by extension, wealth and stability.
•   Housework is linked to the maintenance of lifestyle – it is unpaid but indirectly monetized.
•   Morality is conflated with cleanliness.
•   Health is linked to adherence to social rules and to success and wealth.
•   There is only limited crossover between two related realms: the work done by house-
    keepers and washing machines, and work as studied by physicists and integrated into
    the design and construction of washing machines.
•   The social influence of both washing machines and laundry are assessed following
    psychological methods and principles, and organized for processing by search
    engines and social media.
•   The social influence of laundry is also assessed via often unspoken sequences of obser-
    vations and actions. These unrecorded practices indirectly shape the lines along which
    people establish and police collective boundaries.
•   The social influence of the washing machine is rarely, however, included in academic
    research or discussed in the home.
•   The work of electricity and water systems is rarely discussed in the day to day running
    of the home unless electrical or plumbing work is done – repairs which completely and
    traumatically interrupt the running of the home.
•   Security and stability of one system requires a reduction in security and stability
    of the other.

Another separation leads us to collectively distinguish between the demarcation of continuities
into discrete blocks, and the continuity being demarcated. This leads to a tendency to look
at either one or the other, not both at the same time – overemphasis on either the discrete or
the continuous, rather than seeing both as shaping forces with interacting effects. Separation
and restriction have been common practice for at least as long as humans have farmed land
(building fences and other land defenses prevents cross-pollination and thus leads to more
reliable crop yields). They help us to ensure we have enough resources to survive, to thrive,
and even to plan ahead. Home appliances are involved in localized survival, thriving and
forward-planning – as any housekeeper will tell you. At the same time, such separations are
part of centuries-old and far-reaching systems which restrict and obfuscate.

The symptoms of these restrictions and obfuscations are as complicated and difficult to
observe as the restrictions themselves. This project only begins to highlight some of them.
Broadly speaking, the presence of machines in the home is only noticed when they break
down. Repair work severely disrupts the daily running of the home; apart from the comfort
provided by tea and toilet breaks, the daily routines involved in running a home and family,
in turn, disrupt repair work. In industrial settings, chairs and kitchens are relied upon, but
little noticed until they are removed or broken, at which point distress and disputes begin.

Infrastructures are maintained and machines run smoothly because of restrictions in specific
places: conflations in some areas, separations in others. Without these restrictions, infrastruc-
ture would be visible and overwhelming. We would have to find different ways to process and
handle health, water distribution, temperature control of homes (currently via hot water), and
bodies (currently via clothes). Restrictions, by their very definition, deliberately obscure. By
spending time with washing machines, this project begins to unravel some of the conflations,
possibilities, and restrictions they produce.

Acknowledgements

Project contributors include Tanya Boyarkina, Alan Stanley (Goldsmiths), Eleanor Chownsmith,
Oscar Cass-Darweish, Joe Downing, Patrick King, Carin Jaeger, YoHa (Matsuko Yokokoji, Gra-
ham Harwood), Rebecca Strickson, Terry Norman, The Remakery Brixton, Andrew Downes,
Martins Morozovs, Ben Kagwa, Muchi Lukhezo, Orsetta Hosquet, Lee Maxwell, Andy Freeman,
Mara Ramirez, the Wandle Industrial Museum, Turf Projects, Croydon Arts Store (particularly
Warren Andrews), the members of PACTO collective, Alicia Nicholls, Brian Smith (Choice
Training), Lisa von Schoor, Lev Levitan and Ixtli Orange.

Maxwell, Lee. 'Oldewash: Agitator Alley', Washing Machine Museum, , http://www.oldewash.com/
agitator_alley/agitators.html.
Schwartz Cowan, Ruth. More Work For Mother: The Ironies Of Household Technology From The Open
Hearth To The Microwave, London: Free Association Books, .

      C IS FOR...?

         Cards for
      Collaborative
        Learning of
      / for / from /
      about Critical
          Making
         Verena Kuni
                              (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                                      




    C IS FOR...? CARDS FOR COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
        OF / FOR / FROM / ABOUT CRITICAL MAKING

                                             VERENA KUNI

What Do We Want to Learn Today? If the answer is 'Critical Making', what does that mean? If
we think of Critical Making as a practice, couldn't we just jump in, learning by doing? However,
wouldn't that mean that we already have an idea of what Critical Making is and how it works? So
should we first learn something about Critical Making? If so – and if we want to take our original
purpose seriously – shouldn't our learning process be guided by critical reflection about our
subject as well? Would that mean our learning process should not so much be about finding
answers, but about posing questions? If 'Critical Making' is the answer, what are our questions?

Let's give it a try. Together, let's look at practices, theories, concepts, methods, techniques,
and tools associated with Critical Making to find out more. In doing so, we can examine the
attitudes or stances that each adopts to Critical Making. We can see what kind of questions
they claim to answer by the way they conceive, think, develop, and do Critical Making. Taken
together, these should help us learn of, for, from, and about Critical Making. Thus, we could
start with mapping our terrain. Based on this mapping, we can create a set of index learning
cards that help us to ask our questions.

But how should we map our terrain? Obviously, we will have to do some research, and we will
have to decide which methods to use. Addressing our questions directly to Critical Making
practitioners would certainly be a great idea. Yet, for a variety of reasons, this option is not
always available or practical. Fortunately, there seems to be a valuable alternative. In recent
years, a whole body of literature has sprung up, a growing collection of publications dealing
with practices, theories, concepts, methods, techniques and tools of Critical Making. So we
should consider reading as a solid basis for our mapping. Drawing from a variety of resources
will help us to carry out a mapping that is as varied as it is detailed. It will provide us with a
rich pool of possible key terms for our index, and a rich pool of materials for our learning cards.

However, even the process of conceptualizing practices should come with critical reflection,
shouldn't it? What happens to seemingly neutral processes like mapping and indexing today,
when we can read letters not just as language, but as a brand name of one of informational
capitalism's biggest global players? What about those languages we're learning anyway? And
as long as we're asking questions, shouldn't we also ask about the cards?

As these questions concern the fundamentals of our concept, we will have to explore them first
in some detail before we can begin to make our learning cards. Yet in doing so, we'll find out
that we are already right in the middle of processing Critical Making. Alas, let's give it a try!



C is for...Cards

Why Cards? Cards have a considerably long tradition as learning tools. Most people will be
familiar with a widely used sibling of index cards, the so called 'flash card'. In its basic form,
a flash card comes as a rectangular piece of paper with a question or a problem on one side
and the answer or solution on the other (in the case of language learning, a single word or
phrase on one side and the translation on the other). Learning with flash cards is generally
considered a drill that helps memorize information through active recall. Obviously, this
method of learning makes sense for information we would consider factual and stable (never
mind that this is not necessarily always the case), and that we later want to be able to retrieve
as knowledge on a subject. That's why flash cards can be helpful tools to learn vocabulary,
formulas, numbers, names, terms, taxonomies, orders, chronologies, and the like. And that's
why they neatly connect to established 'orders of knowledge', including ancestors of our
databases like the card-based systems of the 'Zettelwirtschaft'.

However, it is precisely for this reason that flashcards would probably not be our favored
learning tool for Critical Making. Above all, the notion of 'critical' invites us not to take any-
thing for granted in advance, but rather to critically reflect upon our subject, including ideas,
theories, concepts, materials, tools, practices, and processes associated with it. As it stands,
even the concept of Critical Making varies widely. More than a method, it is also framed as a
creative approach, a reflexive practice, a tool for artistic research and design at the interfaces
of media, matter and society, an educational tool, and even a learning strategy by itself. With
this multitude of definitions, if we seriously think about learning cards for Critical Making,
wouldn't we expect a different set of cards and different setups for its many uses?

Certainly flash cards are just one way of using cards as learning tools. Over the past decades,
especially within the creative sectors, other types of cards have enjoyed an astonishing rise.
One reason for this is the connection between learning and playing that has been recently


      Sebastian Leitner in his still popular book Lernen lernen ('Learning How To Learn'; later editions come
      with a slightly different title, So lernt man lernen, Freiburg, Basel and Wien: Herder, ). Although
      today there is also related software, analog flash cards are still widely used learning tools.
      perspective into the present as well and count in many contemporary uses of cards, and also the
      more trendy uses of sticky notes.
      Mapping Sources in the appendix.
      Creative Practice, Hoboken: John Wiley  Sons, ; and obviously in this volume.
                              (UN)LEARNING TECHNOLOGY: HOMO FABER’S TOOLS                                  




reinforced by the gamification of almost everything. Other trends might be included along with
these: the use of hands-on tools in human-centered, 'user-oriented' and community-oriented
design processes; process-oriented cards drawing from experimental and cognitive psychology,
including cards used in therapy and coaching sessions; and even divination systems, because
they also use cards as media for thinking and making. While many of these uses are not primarily
about learning, certain features, properties, and conditions of them may well qualify for being
adapted to learning processes. In many cases the interplay between images and words – often
an important (if not decisive) part of the card design – contributes to opening up a poly-logic
space for thinking and action. Plus, while flash cards are usually addressing an individual
learner and conceive learning as a rather solitary process, many other card systems build upon
communication, and often also upon action – sometimes explicitly anticipating the application
of what is being learned. And the fact that the majority of card systems – just like the majority
of card games – develop and engage with a temporary community of players or participants, is
another good reason why cards can be considered in particular as a tool for collaborative learning.
At the same time, with regard to the different structures of the related 'communities' (obviously,
a therapy session or a future telling session differ from a gameplay session, and a group of
professional skat players differ from a group of friends and again from a family playing cards),
just as in other learning contexts the format will always afford to address questions of power and
power-related hierarchies – those embedded in the 'rules of the game', those embedded in the
framework of the systems it is installed within, as well as those brought in by the people involved.


     other 'tools' related to IDEO's Design Thinking philosophy see https://www.ideo.com/tools; for a nice
     overview on the subject including historical precursors like recipe cards or Brian Eno's and Peter
     Schmidt's Oblique Strategies cards, see Ola Möller, ' Creativity Card Decks: Case Studies', ,
     https://methodkit.com/research-method-cards/; for further reading see Christiane Wölfel and Timothy
     Merritt, 'Method Card Design Dimensions: A Survey of Card-Based Design Tools', in Paula Kotzé,
     Gary Marsden, Gitte Lindgaard, Janet Wesson, Marco Winckler (eds) Human-Computer Interaction -
     recent example, see Denisa Kera's project Parlor of Futures, https://futureparlor.tumblr.com/. For a UX-/
     persuasive design related emulation-appropriation, see Meriç Dağli, 'A Critical Design Sprint Tool. The
     Rules of the Cold-Reading Cards', , http://mericdagli.com/project/a-critical-design-sprint-tool.
Last but not least, one more general point should be made regarding card-based learning
systems. Many card systems, including method cards, come as predesigned, ready-to-use
cards. But creating the cards yourself is helpful, if not instrumental, to the learning process – a
strong argument for not only using cards as tools for collaborative learning, but also for con-
sidering the process of conceiving, designing, and creating the cards as part of the learning
process. However, while active engagement certainly supports active learning, the quality of
knowledge is also bound to the quality of information.

M is for...Mapping

Why mapping? For good reason, Garnet Hertz has proposed 'identifying core metaphors of a
field' as a first step for Critical Making. Due to their general relevance for cognition, concepts,
communication, and culture, metaphors provide keys for understanding the ways we think, act,
and communicate. However, for precisely this reason, it is also impossible to escape their impact.
Thus, we have to be well aware that our keys are both keys in a more literal sense, and at the
same time imagines agentes – directing us and asking for a critical reflection as well. They are
both subjects/objects and tools of and for Critical Making.

Therefore, while our project is not about geography, we can draw insight from the concepts
(methods, theories, practices...) of critical cartography: we should also acknowledge that 'the
map is not the territory it represents'. Our mapping is deeply influenced by the system, the
structure of thought, and language itself. Moreover, our mapping will never ever be able to cover
the subject matter completely – not even approximately.

Nevertheless, mapping can be a useful step in the course of the learning process. While our
primary goal is not to visualize information, in the framework of a collaborative learning process
it certainly makes sense to use some simple form of visualization at least. For example, we might
write the terms on cards and then arrange the collection on a wall in order to discuss them togeth-
er. This would also allow us to discuss the pros and cons of different mapping methods used in
learning processes. If we compare mind mapping versus concept mapping, for instance, the
former can invite us to think about the relations between language and meaning, categorization
and hierarchization, while the latter is probably better suited for gaining insight into the different
concepts of Critical Making, and it might also help us to look for possible cross references.






However, as our starting point are the publications about Critical Making, and as we want to end
up with a series of head words for our learning cards, we could also embrace the basic principles
of semantic mapping, especially as these will also help us with the necessary reductions of our
list. Because Critical Making is closely associated with technology, and especially with digital
technologies, should we also think about using software? Software for text mining, for instance,
would allow us not only to simply retrieve items, but also to automatically export an alphabetical
list. Or should we rather refrain from automated processes, not only due to the preference for
qualitative in contrast to quantitative evaluation, but also due to the fact that we are aiming
to learn of, for, from, and about Critical Making – and thus should bet on human brains and
close-readings, rather than relying on machines to do the work?

Taking into account the benefits of active engagement in learning, particularly in a collaborative,
group-based process, there are good reasons to choose the latter option for the main part. Thus
we would suggest giving more weight to this procedure, and to use automatic procedures rather
for a comparative part in the course of the work process, in order to critically reflect upon the
implications and effects of human versus machine based – or, perhaps more precisely, com-
puter-aided – mapping. As the mapping of contributions to Critical Making [at the intersections
of] Design and Digital Humanities by Jessica Barness and Amy Papelias shows, combinations
of computer-based mappings and visualizations can end up being highly suggestive. Yet, at the
same time, both the readability and the interpretation of these graphs remain debatable. First, lists
of key terms are identified by automated word frequency analyses of single texts. Then, based on
a comparative mining analysis, interrelations between these frequencies are established. What
do these interrelations tell us? Do they really provide insight into conceptual interrelations, as
Barness and Papelias claim? Or do they rather tell us something about vocabulary – about words
rather than meanings, intentions, ideas? Keeping in mind the impact of language and metaphor,
we should perhaps not completely foreclose some parts of the former are indeed included in
the latter – and certainly these results can 'help to better understand the language used to com-
municate the concept of critical making'. However, it is probably important to mind the gap.


     Joseph D. Novak and D. Bob Gowin, Learning How To Learn, Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press,  ().

Either way, just as a map will differ from the territory it aims to cover, gathering these words
is only one step of our work-in-progress. Our decision for an alphabetical order may relieve
us of the weight of any further elaboration of the semantic network. However, we still have
to decide about the choice of key terms to include, as well as the ones to be selected from
the list for figuring as examples for our learning cards. Thus, even if we decide to build upon,
say, a small reading list of publications clearly dedicated to our subject, Critical Making,
what about the mentioned impact of language? How will we deal with seemingly obvious key
terms – 'Critical', 'Making', 'Design', and so on – that are given different meanings by different
authors? And how will we deal with different terms used by different authors to name issues
we would consider as similar or even the same? What about those terms we would consider
to be desperately missing? How will we make our choice?

P is for...Prototypes

Why prototyping? If designing and creating our learning tools ourselves can be considered
as a valuable part of our learning process, the answer to this question seems already given.
But then, at the same time, doesn't learning also mean 'learning from' – learning from others,
and not only from those who are actively engaged in our learning community? Indeed, while
we want to take care about the quality of our work, we also want to avoid reinventing the
wheel. Here, not only will we benefit from research on our subject, but also on our tools. We
should also search specifically for prototypes and predecessors in our field – namely, creating
learning cards for Critical Making.

Indeed, ours is not the first attempt to bet on this format in the context of Critical Making. In
, three years after releasing his substantial collection of zines on our subject matter,
Garnet Hertz developed a prototype for Critical Making Design Process Cards, 'built as an
aid for technology designers to sketch and prototype new designs that are culturally relevant,
socially engaged and challenging of current biases in commercial design'.

While this description seems primarily directed to professional design practitioners, one can
easily imagine using the cards for educational purposes, e.g. in classes at design schools.
Plus, because Critical Making is their subject matter, we would assume that any use of the
cards should initiate learning processes – learning by doing. However, at the core is the design
process itself, so the intention is indeed, according to Hertz' own definition, 'to actually build'
something by following a four-step approach: '. Identifying core metaphors of a field; .
Recognizing what the metaphors exclude or marginalize; . Inverting the metaphor to bring
the marginalized to the center; . Building a new alternative that embodies the inversion'.







The prototyped deck provides a setup of exemplary tasks that are generated by a combination
of different card types, splitting up the tasks into conceptual components. However, if we
come back to Hertz' definition of this process, we find steps - already contained within the
cards themselves. Of course, this doesn't strictly exclude critical reflection, as such reflection
can be stimulated both by the tasks and by the design process itself – not to mention that the
use of the cards can be framed by an into Critical Making and a discussion of
the results. At the same time, it is clear that by using the cards we acknowledge a particular
concept of Critical Making – the one Hertz himself has developed – as a given. Thus, if we
want to learn more about the concept, its background and its references in different theories
and practices, we should probably rely on other resources as well.

But what could a card deck that integrates the first three steps look like? And what about a
card deck with a more open approach, one that allows us to learn about how a broader range
of Critical Making processes can be developed and practiced?

In , Karvita Arvind and Tulip Sinha Neel from the Shrishti Institute of Art, Design and
Technology set out to develop an adaptation of Hertz' process cards that 'could be used in the
Art and Design classroom to teach and learn the concepts of Critical Making'. They started in
class with mapping the field, and came up with five main categories to focus on – Technology,
Materials, Concepts, Time, and Space – each figuring as the centre of a separate mapping.
Two flowcharts were sketched out to further explore possible connections between design
processes and processes of Critical Making. The former informed the latter, and both were
clearly informed by concepts of Design Thinking. Next, three types of cards were developed.
Main cards were related to the main categories identified in the first step, and featured a
selection of the terms collected during the mappings. Enabler Cards prompted users with
design tasks, such as 'sculpt your idea using clay', 'make a moodboard', and 'use electronics
and digital media to build your idea'. Finally, Disruption Cards listed actions like 'donate your
best concept' and 'critique another group's most preferred idea'.


     (ed.) Critical Making; many of them also (re-)appear in publications by other authors on the subject; see
     also the Critical Making Bibliography – Critical Mapping Sources in the appendix.
     Berlin, Heidelberg and New York: Springer, . However, it should be mentioned that there are also
     alternative (and, compared to the former, less business-oriented) approaches to these concepts, see i.e.
     Nigel Cross, Design Thinking: Understanding How Designers Think and Work, Oxford: Berg, .
Compared with Hertz' cards, this prototype seems to be more open in terms of a broader
range of possible concepts of Critical Making in the framework of design processes, and is
probably also more clearly directed to collaborative learning processes. At the same time, the
rather close link with the popular method of design thinking could be scrutinized. Moreover,
the prototype is less clear about the concept of criticality in general, and is also not really
outspoken about the concept(s) of Critical Making it builds upon. As mentioned previously,
in contrast to both the decks prototyped by Hertz and by Arvind/Neel, the purpose here is
not so much to create a set of cards to be used in design processes (whether situated in a
classroom or not), but rather to develop a collection of learning cards that provide insight into
the various concepts, methods, theories, practices, techniques, and tools associated with
Critical Making. With this goal in mind, we need a different approach.

P is for...Proposal

The following paragraphs sketch out a proposal for this process. They are meant as a draft
that can be freely adapted, further refined, or even partially or fully rejected. While the proce-
dure should also work for individual projects, a collaborative learning process and an active
engagement of the collective of learners in the whole process would probably lead to the best
results. So this is not about proposing a strict prototype, but about a more open-ended invi-
tation into a practice. The critical making of the learning cards is a core part of the process.

As a starting point, we propose a mapping of the field based on Critical Making publications
with different approaches, in order to identify key terms related to concepts, methods,
theories, practices, techniques, and tools. These will serve as our INDEX(ed) terms for our
learning cards. Just like traditional index cards, we can add sources to each card, with
QUOTES, NOTES on the context, maybe further references or EXAMPLES to supplement this
information, and probably also #TAGS that encourage cross-referencing this term with other
terms. At this point we might also feel inclined to pin down a brief DEFINITION in our own
words and enhance it with #TAGS as well. Now, our index cards are ready – ready to use as
flash cards for learning or to use as reference material for other purposes.

But what about the QUESTIONS we've been pondering above? While definitions backed
up by references certainly are useful for getting an overview, wouldn't questions be more
appropriate to encourage the development of a critical attitude? If so, will the notorious
W+H – who, what, when, where, why, and how help? Or do we need to find more complex
questions, such as 'in which context?', 'for whom?', 'related to what', or even 'from which






standpoint'? Will we finally be able to frame a master question, a question to which our key-
word is the answer? Or would we prefer instead to activate a multitude of questions? Some
of these questions may prompt us to critically review not only our choice of resources and
references, but also our choice of INDEX terms and thus ask for further engagement in the
CRITICAL MAKING of our learning cards. Let's give it a try...

Drucker, Johanna. Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge Production, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, .
Greiner-Petter, Moritz. 'Unmaking:  Anxieties – Unmaking Kit / Unmaking Cards', , https://www.
ixdm.ch/wp-content/uploads///unmaking_cards_web.pdf.
Hertz, Garnet (ed.) Critical Making, Hollywood: Telharmonium Press,  (pdf-Edition ), http://
conceptlab.com/criticalmaking/.
Kelley, Tom. The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from IDEO, America's Leading Design Firm,
New York: Doubleday, .
Korzybski, Alfred. Science and Sanity: An to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General
Semantics, ^th edition, New York: Institute of General Semantics, .
Krajewski, Markus. Zettelwirtschaft. Die Geburt der Kartei aus dem Geiste der Bibliothek, Berlin: Kul-
turverlag Kadmos, . Engl.: Paper Machines: About Cards and Card Catalogs , trans.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By, Chicago: Chicago University Press, .
Leitner, Sebastian. So lernt man lernen, Freiburg, Basel and Wien: Herder, .
Möller, Ola. ' Creativity Card Decks: Case Studies', , https://methodkit.com/research-
method-cards/.

University Press, ^st edition , rd edition .
Plattner, Hasso, Christoph Meinel and Larry Leifer (eds) Design Thinking: Understand – Improve –
Apply, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York: Springer, .
Somerson, Rosanne and Hermano, Mara L. (eds) The Art of Critical Making: Rhode Island School of
Design on Creative Practice, Hoboken: John Wiley  Sons, .
Wölfel, Christiane and Timothy Merritt. 'Method Card Design Dimensions: A Survey of Card-Based
Design Tools', in Paula Kotzé, Gary Marsden, Gitte Lindgaard, Janet Wesson, Marco Winckler (eds)
     ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY   




Enkel Collective:
  Making Change
      Makers
  Benjamin Matthews

       ENKEL COLLECTIVE: MAKING CHANGE-MAKERS
                                      BENJAMIN MATTHEWS

      We always said that our mission is to create a new generation of change-makers, not
      be change-makers ourselves.

      - Adam Jorlen

Enkel Collective was established in late  in the small post-industrial port city of Fre-
mantle, near Perth in Western Australia, during the tail-end of a decade long 'mining boom'
in a region that relies heavily on primary industries for its economic survival. Not long
afterward, my conversations with co-founder Adam Jorlen began, and during an interview
in late December , we discussed the journey to date. Here, I reflect on our conversa-
tion, sharing portions from a unique sociotechnical experiment that responded to growing
precarity by building and sustaining an organized network.

We first met in July , and Adam took me on a tour of a dusty, ancient Navy warehouse
by the Fremantle harbor that Enkel had temporary use of. It was cavernous and empty, save
for piles of rusting bicycles that were part of a discontinued social enterprise. As we wandered
about, he energetically described in his lilting, Swedish accent plans to win permission from
local government to keep the huge space. In mid- his patience will pay off and Enkel
Naval Store will open.

Enkel plans to deploy 'post-blockchain' Holochain-based cryptocurrency to facilitate a decen-
tralized approach to governance and exchange within the micro-economy of the Naval Store.
They hope this system can become a larger experiment in the surrounding community,
fostering a transparent, ethically grounded marketplace. As Adam explained, employing
emerging technology to facilitate change-making in the long term is a key strategy for Enkel:

      We have been working on the Naval Store for  years, and the lease is for twenty
      years because we are thinking cross-generational time scales: that space is for our
      kids. My hope is that this means my daughter will have a space in which to prototype
      the future in ten years. This is a living lab, as we always call it, and that's our mission.
      Many of us have kids, and having that mission keeps us going.

There is a certain patient determination at play here, a drive to move outside the short-cycle
tactics that undermine the impact of much activism. To this end, the collective is formally


      Boom on the Australian Economy', Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. -
      (August , ), https://ssrn.com/abstract=.




divided into three arms: Enkel U (a 'School for Change-makers'), the Enkel Naval Store, and
Enkel Consultancy. From this base, participants engage in social entrepreneurship, run
workshops and events, and work with business, government and non-profits as facilitators
and consultants. They conduct social innovation experiments, like establishing temporary
makerspaces, MOOC study groups and living labs in a range of settings, including co-working
hubs and facilities owned by local government.

This long view, together with the mission to attain a sustainable approach to decentralized
forms of organization, has seen Enkel make hard short-term decisions and show a willingness
to trial (and fail with) various structures. Following a review in , the collective was pared
from  people down to  core members. This process aimed to create a stable core of
trusted individuals, who steward the culture, while an extended, global network of partici-
pants numbering in the hundreds provides additional support and resources. Similarly, Adam
explained, they enable entrepreneurship, but clip its wings when it falters:

     We had three arms: Enkel Pro, Enkel U, and the Naval Store. Enkel Pro did so well
     it separated into an entity called Flow Edge, driven by two of our members who are
     really entrepreneurial go-getters, which didn't work out. I think that was because
     some people wanted to be full-on consultants working all the time, while others like
     me wanted to come in and work only sometimes or just as facilitators. So now we're
     back to Enkel Consultancy. We have regular meetings and we are still trying to sort
     out how we are going to work together as independent consultants who still have a
     relation to Enkel.

Market pragmatism filters this mode of post-industrial social entrepreneurship, where deci-
sions about who to work with are always determined by the constant determination to facilitate
change-making from the bottom up:

    We work with local and state government enabling creative innovation, highlighting
    the importance of spaces like makerspaces – we take a bottom up rather than top
    down approach. We've worked with the Departments of Transport and Water on
    public consultation workshops for local government around missioning and the future.
    We focus on a mix between innovation and design thinking and now have  consult-
    ants on the roster. We also work with the Perth City Farm, a non-profit that needs a
    new strategy. We work with organizations that have similar values to us. We decided
    we agree on not going to work with the mining industry or oil and gas.

This values-driven approach is realized in sociotechnical experiments that seek to amplify
the potentials in the network by defining the minimal conditions required to permit action.
This means decentralizing governance and generating flow as needs dictate – moving back
and forth between hierarchy and anarchism, loose bonds and tight, consensus and disarray,
inclusion and exclusion. To put it in Adam's words, to achieve these goals, 'we have to create
an organization that is an effective container, that can hold those paradoxes'.

Experiments in decentralized decision-making are the best example, particularly the use
of the open-source cloud-based software Loomio. Loomio provides every participant with
an equal opportunity to contribute, support, vote on, or block decisions from a smartphone
application, securely recording this process for later review. After a slow beginning, Adam
explains, Loomio has proven increasingly effective at facilitating transparent, inclusive, and
egalitarian decision-making processes:

      Loomio is really good but it has taken a long time in the same way as other stuff. In
      the beginning people didn't use it. Now people use it all the time and start to under-
      stand, 'AHA! This is nothing I can just decide, this is something that is going to affect
      more people, I better put it on Loomio'. The person who was here running Enkel
      U has just moved to Melbourne, and she wants to set up something similar there
      under our auspices, and she will have to go through that process on Loomio. We are
      co-hosting a New Economy Network Australia (NENA) conference next month here in
      Perth, and they will have to put that up on Loomio to ask the group if they are OK to
      take that risk – which it is, to organize a big conference. People only have to put up
      the big stuff, and they have to learn the difference. The interesting thing about Loo-
      mio is that people care about the possibility to have their say, not about having their
      say. Normally they don't vote, and the main vote is 'abstain', which means I trust you;
      I trust the group. But they get pissed off if decisions get made without being put up
      on Loomio. It's almost like an automatic liquid democracy, and if you're passionate
      about something you will jump in. In general persistence is the main thing.

It is inclusive transparency that mediates consensus through this rather simple technical
solution. While the technology is a capable facilitator, its affordances are entangled with
the cultural practices of the network and persistence has been the marker of its success,
particularly in ensuring consensus is maintained. As Adam observes, they have discov-
ered that decentralizing governance allows consensus to facilitate highly independent
endeavors:

      For example, one participant wanted to start a co-working space and he just went off
      and did it and made it happen independently, and the one thing he put on Loomio
      was the question: Can I say this was supported by Enkel on the website? And the
      group said: 'Yes'. That's the one rule we have: it has to be supported by the group.

The quality of gradual adoption, and the importance of transparency and trust, are per-
sistent themes in this cooperative structure. As a technical culture emerged within Enkel
over time, collective activity that operates on a decentralized basis became more feasible.
That is, the effective use of decision-making software did not require technical literacy
so much as a culture of recognition for its effectiveness and relevance. On top of this,





the participants demonstrate their cultural knowledge by understanding the difference
between decisions that require collective participation, and those that do not.

This engagement with software is in part due to a general orientation toward transfor-
mation that is led by technology – particularly where a scalable, radical alteration might
be prototyped to disrupt and reconfigure current paradigms of exchange in economic,
cultural, and political settings. For example, Adam explains their interest in blockchain
as follows:

    We did a lot of work with the 'post-blockchain' tech Holochain this year, and we
    want to go seriously into not only collaborating with government, but we want to
    start our own local economy within the Naval Store with a coin you can use to buy
    things in there, and see if that can move out to more people, like cafes, restau-
    rants and business in Freeo [Freemantle]. Holochain is more aligned with our
    values than older blockchain-based cryptocurrencies. You can't use it to specu-
    late and it's based on a system called 'mutual credit' and it's way more interesting
    for us.

The network culture that Enkel participants are entangled with is characterized by a
specific ethos where knowledge acquisition is both aspirational and values driven. It is
not enough to take up bleeding-edge technology like blockchain, for instance, merely for
the sake of its newness. Instead, it is the capacity for change-making toward particular
goals that determines its use.

Again, sustainability, resilience, and long-term impact mark the way the collective engag-
es with technology and is shaped by it. But this pattern is inspired by network interac-
tions, and the general orientation toward tapping the potentials in agency created by fluid
interactions and open structures. As Adam noted, the original move towards blockchain
technologies was directly inspired by this ethos:

    We had one member who was a really good Ethereum developer, so we were
    pulled into his world. He was the CTO [Chief Technology Officer] for an early
    blockchain ICO [Initial Coin Offering] called Powerledger, and we were hanging
    out with them. We are really curious people at Enkel, so we go into everything.
    We are all over the place, some of us are going to things to do with IoT [Internet
    of Things], others blockchain, some theory U, then we share that and cross post
    and go to each other's events. It's a really interesting thing, how it works.



    return to zero before leaving the system. See the PP Foundation Wiki entry for a range of resources on
    the topic: https://wiki.ppfoundation.net/Mutual_Credit.

Dialogue is the generative force that drives this process, both within the collective, and
with the world, and sudden change is often based on this conversation. The members
critically engage and experiment with both traditional and avant-garde ways to hack
existing organizational structures and practices for their own purposes in a range of
public and internal fora.

For example, Adam explained that Enkel members connected with participants in NENA
based in Brisbane, Queensland, on the far side of Australia. This originated a further pro-
cess of discovery and relationship building that uncovered a local network of people already
attempting to prototype new modes of exchange:

      I know a lot of people in this scene, like you, across the world. I am always scan-
      ning. Four Enkel people went to meet the NENA people in Brisbane and go to their
      conference to see what is going on in , and we really liked it. So we thought:
      why don't we do one here in Perth? The cool thing with bringing together all these
      new economy-related things – like permaculture, cooperatives, blockchain, renegade
      education, so many different things – is it all fits in, like makerspaces, tool libraries,
      and we are like 'cool, this is all the stuff we have been doing for the past few years'. A
      person who is not a systems thinker, trying to see how these things are related, might
      think it's just a fucking mess! What is this conference about? [laughs] You know? But
      for us, this is just exactly what we are about. So, we held one here in August [],
      we had  people there or more, and we were like, HOLY SHIT! Who are all these
      people? But you see there are people like us, hiding in various rooms and corners of
      every city, but there haven't been many forums to bring them out and Enkel is one
      of those forums and this conference is a good example and we will do another one
      next year in October. The  people in Enkel have a big reach, we had blockchain,
      permaculture, game designers using games for good, cooperatives (the new kind, not
      the old like farmers etc.), Theory U, steady state economics, currency designers, new
      possibilities for Western Australia.

The dynamics of the collective are reflected in fora like this, where the network is suddenly
scaled into a larger, more diverse group of mutually supporting change-makers. This is how
Adam has frequently characterized Enkel: as a power base that amplifies patterns of resistance.

Within this cultural scene, the role of scalability is central, and in important ways located in the
sociality of network interactions. If scaling up is to be achieved, it is not at the expense of the
ideal of decentralized governance. After all, scaling always holds the danger of collapsing into
older social paradigms of hierarchy and control. If scaling holds a certain ambivalence, this
is partly because it is the sociality of the org-net that defines trust. For Adam, trust emerges
from the rhythm of direct relations, and it is these interpersonal interactions that creates the
continuity he considers vital to their resilience:

      Sometimes you have to centralize, so we have our regular weekend retreats with the
      whole group. That's the most important thing in the collective, and it's where we don't
      talk that much about Enkel; it's about building relationships with each other. Then
                            ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                            




     we go out and do our own thing. We have four co-op meetings a year, which are an
     update on projects, two retreats a year, and we meet up every Thursday night, which
     can be anything. A dinner, a workshop, a presentation. Tomorrow we are doing a
     skills inventory workshop where we help each other get our skills out, sometimes we
     go to another organization's event as a more social thing. You gotta have a rhythm.
     Even if we don't wanna meet or don't have anything to talk about, we have to keep
     the rhythm of meeting. It's one of the key things.

So it is interpersonal relationships, not more formal network interactions, that forge the basis
of trust. However, consistent dialogue with a larger network of interactants remains import-
ant in that these interactions can be parlayed into activism. The dynamics of this activism
are charged by potentials that the members are aware of and seek, but can sometimes be
surprised by. In the end, the resilient quality of the collective defines its capacity to resist the
larger forces that surround it, where the balance between action and destruction is always
poised to shift. Enkel use technology to manage these dynamics, but where they succeed
it is due to persistence and critical engagement, not the sudden appearance of a deus ex
machina. The decision-making software Loomio, for instance, was not an initial success, and
their interest in Holochain is driven by the goal of a transparent model of exchange in the
long term, rather than bloody minded entrepreneurship or speculation.

And here we arrive at the paradox of Enkel: a collective that fosters change-makers by
allowing contradictory patterns to co-exist with unchanging continuity. Meaningful change
requires uniting disruption and stability. A sustainable organization of this kind has proven to
be generative of resilience in the face of growing precarity, and as relationships mature, so
too does the network culture. But Adam deserves the final word, and he explains it like this:

     We all talk about entrepreneurship, and that can be cutthroat like Silicon Valley – it's
     not like that here. But creativity is always destruction, if someone starts something
     new it fragments the group and creates tensions. But now, people have been here so
     long, that they tend not to leave even if they're pissed off. Now people are annoyed
     for a while, and then they come back. It's like a family, I suppose. It's a very diverse
     weird collective that would never hang out if it wasn't for Enkel – some of us are
     friends of course. Its Muslims, hardcore Christians, you know, but it works.





    C-Node:
Subverting the
  Black Boxes
 of Amazon Web
  Services in
     Dublin

   Paul O’Neill

          C-NODE: SUBVERTING THE BLACK BOXES OF
             AMAZON WEB SERVICES IN DUBLIN

                                            PAUL O' NEILL


Black Box City

Over the past  years, Dublin, the capital city of the Republic of Ireland, has become an import-
ant node within the physical and corporate infrastructure of the internet. This is a result of some of
the most dominant tech companies of our current networked era, such as Amazon, Google and
Facebook, maintaining significant operations there. These operations take place in the various
corporate headquarters located in the city center, and also within the massive hyperscale data
centers situated in various business parks and industrial estates in its suburbs. The size and
scale of these companies are so vast and complex that they are almost impenetrable, reminding
us of the 'black boxes' of technology as suggested by Bruno Latour – we know what goes into
them and what comes out, but their internal processes are a mystery to most.

This article discusses an ongoing practice-based research project by the author that investi-
gates the operations of these companies, with a particular focus on Amazon Web Services. It
argues that the black box metaphor can be applied to Dublin itself, due to the various complexly
overlapping digital, political, social, financial, and physical infrastructures surrounding the tech
companies based there. From identifying physical infrastructures of the internet within Dublin to
the analysis of Internet Protocol (IP) addresses alongside planning permission documents, this
article documents creative strategies that engage with this black boxing of technology.

Making and Breaking

Critical making is an approach that links two different types of practice that normally exist within
two separate fields, critical thinking and physical making. It is a reaction to the 'maker' movement
perhaps best exemplified by Make Magazine, or as Garnet Hertz puts it, 'after learning a D
printer, making an LED blink, or using an Arduino, then what?'. Critical making is also linked to
a media archaeology approach as suggested by Garnet Hertz and Jussi Parikka. This approach
incorporates practices and exercises surrounding DIY culture that are 'closely related to the
political economy of Information Technology' and which are used as artistic methods and tools



      Information Society  (): p. .
      Leonardo . (): p. .
                              ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                                 




for both investigation and intervention. This approach allows us look inside the black boxes of
technology to not only analyze the physical materials within, but also to consider and reflect on
the underlying systems and infrastructures from which they emerge. As 'things' become more
and more 'connected', it is increasingly important to look beyond and beneath the object itself,
to consider where, how, and why this connectivity is occurring and also the consequences of
it. Both critical making and media archaeology provide a conceptual space in which to do so.

There are many artists currently excavating the black boxes of the technological artifacts and
interfaces of our networked society, informed in part by the approaches mentioned above.
These include Benjamin Grosser, the Critical Engineering Group, Joana Moll, Share Lab,
VTOL, and many others. Other examples that engage similarly with technology from these
conceptual viewpoints can be found in accompanying texts and manifestos from this communi-
ty. The Critical Interface Manifesto speaks of the interface as 'the tip of the iceberg of a complex
system of agents/agencies, of interdependent infrastructures, codes, data, applications, laws,
corporations, individuals, sounds, spaces, behaviors, objects, protocols, buttons, times, affects,
effects, defects'. Similarly, the Critical Engineering Manifesto argues that our dependency on
any given technology requires 'the need to study and expose its inner workings' and 'considers
the exploit to be the most desirable form of exposure'.

The work of artists such as those mentioned above, alongside manifestos that simultaneously
highlight the need for a critical engagement with technology whilst suggesting conceptual
lenses in which to do so, allows us to understand and engage with complex techno-political
issues from a creative perspective. Whilst there are limitations in these approaches, they are
offset by the scope for experimentation within the investigative process and more importantly,
for the potential dissemination of the research undertaken within these artistic practices. These
practices are able to circumnavigate 'official' narratives of technological progress. In so doing,
they shed light on the corporate, political, and physical infrastructures that technological
systems and devices are built upon.

Celtic Tiger, Californian Ideology

In recent years Ireland has become a significant global hub in relation to the strategic busi-
ness interests of the information  communication technology (ICT) companies based there.
Despite its location on the edge of Europe, it is very much at its center in relation to the
presence of ICTs. The industry employs over , people and generates exports worth €


billion annually. This is a result of Ireland's long history of attracting Foreign Direct Invest-
ment (FDI), which started in the s. International tech companies have been based
in Ireland since this period. IBM, for example, established an office in . The active
cultivation of FDI by successive Irish governments saw many international tech companies
establishing assembly operations from the s onwards, including Apple, Ericsson, and
Fujitsu, who were later followed by Intel, Microsoft, Xerox, and Cisco. This growth continued
into the new millennium, and today many of the tech companies associated with the Web
. era have significant operations in Ireland, including Amazon, Facebook, Google, and
Twitter. Most of these companies operate out of the Grand Canal Dock area of Dublin City, now
commonly referred to as 'Silicon Docks'. To the more cynical, or indeed critical, the Silicon
Docks narrative can be viewed as the Celtic Tiger developing its own 'Californian Ideology'.
The reasons these tech companies choose Ireland as their corporate base are varied and
include a generous corporate tax rate, political stability, proximity in relation to the US, UK,
and EU, the presence of an English-speaking and well-educated workforce, along with relaxed
conditions for attracting non-national specialized workers. All of these factors have made
Ireland a significant node within the international corporate tech infrastructure.

Whois Ireland

Influenced by the work of Share Lab, in particular their investigations surrounding the tracing
of internet protocol (IP) addresses, I began to look to look at IP addresses in Ireland. Spe-
cifically, I had two guiding questions, how many IP addresses are registered in Ireland and
who are they registered to?

Whilst there are networking tools such as traceroute and whois that provide information about
IP addresses, they were unfeasible due to the amount of IP addresses I was attempting to
identify. Consequently, I used various online IP geolocation resources.

As of July , Ireland had ,, IPv addresses assigned to it, % of which were
controlled by  different corporate and state entities.







 Company                                                                         # IP Addresses Registered
 Amazon.com Inc.                                                                                        ,,
 Heanet Ltd.                                                                                            ,,
 Eircom Ltd.                                                                                            ,,
 Microsoft Corporation                                                                                  ,,
 Liberty Global Operations B.V.                                                                           ,
 BT Communications Ireland Ltd.                                                                           ,
 Imagine Communications Group Ltd.                                                                        ,
 Vodafone Ireland Ltd.                                                                                    ,
 Apple Inc.                                                                                               ,
 Three Ireland (Hutchison) Ltd.                                                                           ,
 Total                                                                                                ,,


As the above table shows, the top ten mostly consists of internet service providers such
as Vodafone, BT, and Three. We also see Heanet Limited, which is Ireland's National
Education and Research Network. However, what is most interesting in this table is the
presence of the tech companies mentioned earlier, Apple, Microsoft, and in particular,
with almost % of all IPv addresses in Ireland registered to it – Amazon. At this point,
it should be noted that the online resources used for this exercise are not verifiable.
Also, public IPv addresses do not tell the full story in relation to network engineering
infrastructures. However, the above exercise provided enough information for me to
begin to look at the operations of Amazon in Ireland.

(Un)Availability Zone

Amazon established operations in Ireland in  and currently employs , people,
, who are employed by its subsidiary cloud computing company Amazon Web
Services (AWS). Alongside its Burlington Road corporate offices, located in an afflu-
ent part of Dublin a few minutes walk from the Silicon Docks, Amazon also operates a
number of data centers in Dublin. The data center industry is growing rapidly in Ireland
and is expected to have invested € billion in the economy by . There are 
operational data centers in Ireland as of November .  The majority of these are



located in business parks and industrial estates surrounding Dublin city. These are all
in close proximity to the T fibre optic cable that follows the M motorway around the
city. Most of the data centers in Ireland are 'hyperscale' facilities operated by Facebook,
Google, Microsoft, and AWS.

The international infrastructure of AWS data centers is based around Regions and Avail-
ability Zones (AZs). A region is a geographical division composed of availability zones,
which are essentially clusters of individual data centers. As of March , the global
infrastructure of AWS spans  different regions, comprised of  availability zones.
Ireland is one such region, 'EU-West-', and has three different availability zones, all
located around Dublin city and in close proximity to the T fibre optic cable mentioned
previously. As artist Ingrid Burrington notes, unlike other hyperscale operators, AWS
prefers to keep the locations of its data centers as quiet as possible.  So much so in fact,
that in October  WikiLeaks published what it referred to as a 'highly confidential'
internal AWS document, listing the locations of over  AWS data centers worldwide.
Within the context of my own research I did not have to rely on leaked documents.
Although it is difficult to find the exact locations, in comparison to other hyperscale
operators, of AWS data centers in Ireland, I was able to accurately pinpoint their locations
by accessing publicly available planning permission documents on the website of South
Dublin County Council. AWS data center. 
You will notice in because in order for AWS to be listed here, they would have to list themselves. Also, if you
go into Google street view you can see the data center in question. However, I would still
suggest that this raises questions about the absence of representation of these massive
physical infrastructures within virtual cartographies.

Having identified the locations of the data centers, it was now time to ‘visit’ one of the
Availability Zones in Tallaght, a working class suburb in west Dublin. This particular
Availability Zone comprises  different data centers, with two more currently under
construction. The building themselves are mostly windowless, surrounded by fences
with signs warning that the sites are monitored by international security company GS.
There is no indication of what the buildings are used for or who owns them, with the
exception of planning application notices, which they are legally obliged to display. It
is hard to stand outside of these buildings and not be reminded of the black boxes of
technology mentioned earlier.











Greenhills Road, Tallaght, Dublin , .



 .




application on fence), Tallaght, Dublin , .
                             ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                                




This is all in stark contrast to the AWS corporate offices mentioned earlier, where workers stream
out of the office wearing polo shirts and lanyards with the AWS logo emblazoned upon them. I
have visited this Availability Zone on several occasions. On some of these outings I have been
approached by security guards telling me that I was not permitted to take pictures of the building,
even though I was standing on a public road. On these occasions I have asked the security guards
the following two questions: what are inside the buildings, and who owns them?

Each time the security guards have declined to answer either question, usually responding
with a variation of 'we are not allowed to say'. If it wasn't so ridiculous (the planning permission
applications (them), it would be sinister. So, aside from obvious concerns surrounding public access and
photography, and more general concerns in relation to data centers such as data sovereignty,
environmental impacts, and so on, why should we focus on AWS and their operations in Ireland?

Apart from customers such as AirBnB, Ryanair, and Netflix, AWS also works with the American
Government. It operates a region called 'Govcloud' which is used by various US governmental
agencies to host sensitive data. In , it announced an 'AWS Secret region', which works
specifically with US intelligence services to store and access information across all classification
levels up to and including 'top secret'. AWS has also been criticized for selling its facial rec-
ognition software 'Rekognition' to different law enforcement agencies. At the time of writing,
AWS is also believed to be in the running for a $ billion contract for the US department of
Defense's Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure (JEDI) project, which will see the Pentagon
moving completely into the 'cloud'. Whilst this contract is not confirmed, putting it together
with AWS's other engagements with the US military and government begins to resemble what
Brian Holmes refers to as the 'imperial infrastructures' of ICTs. Whilst all of these issues are not
necessarily occurring on Irish soil, we really have no way of knowing for sure. Regardless of this,
AWS's significant, yet almost invisible, presence in Ireland is enough to raise questions or some
form of critical engagement beyond the aforementioned Silicon Docks narrative.

So what to do with all this information? How best to disseminate it to an audience beyond the
academy? Tech companies such as AWS all interact with each other, with the government, with
the local infrastructureyet these interactions are to a certain extent black boxed. We are aware
that they are there and what they do externally, but we never really get to see how everything
is connected, the corporate to the physical, the physical to the political, and so on. Matt Ratto



notes that by understanding the systems and artifacts that we build, we can 'contrast them both
(materially and semiotically) in more liberatory and productive ways', developing methodologies
that create a better understanding of our material engagement with technology is of the utmost
importance. This understanding needs to extend beyond technological artifacts themselves
and to the systems and infrastructures they are integrated within, be they corporate and digital,
such as GDPR, economic, such as corporate tax rates, the double Irish etc, or the actual physical
infrastructures, the 'stuff you can kick'. In short, greater transparency is needed, and if it is not
coming from those controlling these systems, we should provide it for ourselves and for each
other. As for AWS and their desire for invisibility in relation to their cloud based operations, we
can look to the work of Andrew Blum, who argues that 'if we're entrusting so much of who we
are to large companies, they should entrust us with a sense of where they're keeping it all, and
what it looks like'.

C-Node: a Tour of Dublin's Internet and Corporate Tech Infrastructures

 The idea of exploring the mediated city as a participatory experience has been used by many
 artists, including Benjamin Gaulon (.Ghz Workshops, −present), Conor McGarrigle
 (NamaLand, ), Nick Briz and Brannon Dorsey (Wifi Data Safari Workshop, ), RYBN
 (Offshore Tour Operator, ), and Mario Santamaria (Madrid, Barcelona and Zaragoza Inter-
 net tours, −), amongst others. Diverging from a media archaeology that focuses on
'media', Shannon Mattern advocates an 'urban media archaeology' that investigates how media
 networks are dependent on other infrastructural networks. Because of the concentration of
 large tech companies based here and their proximity to key elements of the internet's physical
 infrastructure, Dublin provides an excellent case study for this approach. Mattern also suggests
 that participation in projects like walking tours 'create their own further infrastructures – infor-
 mational, social, political, creative etc – for further action'.

In October , I invited a number of artists, academics, and activists to join me on a guided
walking tour entitled 'C-Node: A Tour of Dublin's Internet and Corporate Tech Infrastructures'.
Since then, I have led various iterations of the tour with both individuals and groups. The pur-
pose of this tour is to explore elements of Dublin's physical internet infrastructure alongside the
corporate topologies that support it, and in doing so, to raise awareness of Ireland's relationship
with the tech companies based there.






The tour begins with a short presentation of my general research and methodologies into Dublin's
internet infrastructure, alongside the conceptual lenses that have informed it, including critical
making and media archaeology. This is then followed by a guided walk through Dublin city centre,
where we trace physical aspects of the internet within the city via cellular towers and underground
fibre optic cables (Guide to Urban Internet Infrastructure as a guide. The next part of the tour takes place in the
Silicon Docks areas of the city. Specifically, we 'visit' the offices of AirBnB, Facebook, and Goo-
gle, where myself and various guest speakers give a series of small presentations on the issues
and concerns associated with these companies (Availability Zone in Tallaght discussed earlier (between all the participants on the findings of the tour and possible future steps and actions.

 Artist Jonah Brucker-Cohen suggests that 'network interaction can be subverted by creating
 projects that emphasize the surrounding factors of networked interactions such as the location,
 physical proximity, connected data streams, and mindset of users'. This is the intention of
 C-Node, to subvert the network interactions of the corporate tech entities based in Dublin by
 linking their operations within the city to the rest of the networked world. Through this process,
 it is hoped to facilitate public conversation and debate within the local context surrounding the
'external façades' of ICTs and the black boxes upon which they are built.




, photo by Harikrishnan Sasikumar.

photo by Harikrishnan Sasikumar.




, photo by Èrika Marcet.






Participatory Explorations

This research is still in progress. It is a project that seeks to reflect on and engage with
many of the key issues of our current networked society. As these issues further expand
and permeate our lives, projects and interventions such as C-Node need to continually
adapt and evolve to react to them. In relation to AWS and the many other tech companies
of the digital era, their influence and dominance is not just through the digital interfaces
we interact with, but also in the physical, real world. The physical infrastructure of ICTs
spans borders, markets, states, and ideologies. This means that, although C-Node is a
project rooted in Dublin, the issues it highlights and the creative dissemination of research
it suggests are relevant and applicable anywhere. Artistic interventions and technological
provocations not only raise awareness of these issues, but also promote an engagement
with technology that is more critical and reflective than conventional discourses. It is
important to disseminate practice-based research beyond the academy or gallery in order
to share information with others who may not normally have access to such information. In
turn, the conversations generated by disseminating such research outside of 'traditional'
areas can lead to more engagement, more discourse, and perhaps galvanize other inter-
ventions. C:Node seeks to promote participatory engagement so that others can explore
the corporate topologies of the internet that surround us, collectively and critically.

Acknowledgements

The tour images used in this article feature participants from The School of Machines,
Making and Make-Believe Future Landscapes program that took place in Galway and
Dublin in May .



Burrington, Ingrid. 'Why Amazon's Data Centres are Hidden in Spy Country', The Atlantic,  January ,
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive///amazon-web-services-data-center//.
'Coalition Letter to Amazon Urging Company Commit not to Release Face Surveillance Product', Amer-
 ican Civil Liberties Union,  January , https://www.aclu.org/coalition-letter-amazon-urging-com-
 pany-commit-not-release-face-surveillance-product.
Cox, Aengus. 'Amazon to Create , Dublin Jobs Over Next Two Years', RTÉ,  June , https://
www.rte.ie/news///-amazon-web-services-jobs.
Critical Engineering Group. 'The Critical Engineering Manifesto', , www.criticalengineering.org.
Donnelly, Paul. 'How Foreign Firms Transformed Ireland's Domestic Economy', The Irish Times, 
November , http://www.irishtimes.com/business/how-foreign-firms-transformed-ireland-sdomes-
tic-economy-..
Gaulon, Benjamin. http://www.recyclism.com, .
Grosser, Benjamin. https://bengrosser.com, .
Hangar. 'Manifesto for a Critical Approach to the Interface', , https://interfacemanifesto.
hangar.org/index.php/Main_Page.
Hertz, Garnet (ed.), Critical Making, Hollywood, CA: Telharmonium Press, , http://www.concept-
lab.com/criticalmaking.
Hertz, Garnet and Jussi Parikka. 'Zombie Media: Circuit Bending Media Archaeology into an Art Meth-
Holmes, Brian. Unleashing the Collective Phantoms: Essays in Reverse Imagineering, Brooklyn:
Autonomedia.
'IBM in Ireland:  Decades of Innovation', IBM, , https://www-.ibm.com/ie/ibm/pdf/
 yearsInnovation.pdf.
IDA Ireland, https://www.idaireland.com/doing-business-here/industry-sectors/ict.
'Invisible Infrastructures: Internet Map of Serbia', Share Lab,  February , https://labs.rs/en/internet-map.
'Introduction to the AWS GovCloud Region', AWS Amazon, https://aws.amazon.com/govcloud-us.
Ireland's National Education and Research Network, heanet.ie.
Kittler, Friedrich. Optical Media, Cambridge: Polity Press, .
Latour, Bruno. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, .
Mattern, Shannon. Deep Mapping the City, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, .
Mattern, Shannon. 'Infrastructural Tourism', Places Journal, July , https://placesjournal.org/
article/infrastructural-tourism.
McAuley, David and Garry Connolly. 'Ireland's Data Hosting Industry, , Q Update', Host in
Ireland  Bitpower Energy Solutions, November , http://www.bitpower.ie/images/Reports/Bitpow-
er__Q_Update_Vsml.pdf.
McGarrigle, Conor. https://www.conormcgarrigle.com, .
Moll, Joana. http://www.janavirgin.com, .
Nix, Naomi. 'Inside the Nasty Battle to Stop Amazon from winning the Pentagon's Cloud Contract',
Bloomberg,  December , https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/--/tech-giants-
fight-over--billion-pentagon-cloud-contract.
                              ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                             


O' Brien, Ciara. 'Data Centre Investment in Ireland to Near €bn by , The Irish Times,  April
, https://www.irishtimes.com/business/technology/data-centre-investment-in-ireland-to-near-bn-
by--..
Parks, Lisa. '"Stuff You Can Kick": Toward a Theory of Media Infrastructures', Academia. https://www.
academia.edu//Stuff_You_Can_Kick_Toward_a_Theory_of_Media_Infrastructures.
Ratto, Matt. 'Critical Making: Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life', The
RYBN. http://rybn.org, .
Santamaria, Mario. http://www.mariosantamaria.net, .
Share Lab. https://labs.rs/en, .
Smith, Stephen. 'FDIIreland's  Year Overnight Success Story', Irish Central,  May , https://
www.irishcentral.com/business/technology/fdi-irelands--year-overnight-success story.
South Dublin County Council, Planning Applications, http://www.sdublincoco.ie/Planning/Applica-
tions?p=name=ADSIL.
VTOL, http://vtol.cc, .

    Demolition
 Machines: Making
and Thinking with
Databases of Urban
   Regeneration

      Tom Keene
                            ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                             




    DEMOLITION MACHINES: MAKING AND THINKING
     WITH DATABASES OF URBAN REGENERATION

                                           TOM KEENE

Cressingham Gardens Estate (henceforth Cressingham) is a green and leafy social hous-
ing estate based in South West London that is owned by Lambeth Council (henceforth
Lambeth). The estate has a low crime rate and is well liked by the majority of residents. I
purchased my leasehold home on Cressingham in  and currently live there with my
wife and two young children. In , Lambeth cabinet members voted to demolish Cress-
ingham as part of their (now) £. billion borough-wide program of urban regeneration.

In , Lambeth housing officers (henceforth officers) began consultation meetings with
residents and commented that 'the database told us Cressingham is too expensive to
repair'. This comment inspired my PhD research project Database (e)State that investigates
the role of Lambeth's housing databases in the maintenance, repair, and regeneration
of their housing stock. This ongoing project and thesis provides the basis of this essay.

I undertake acts of making, programming, activism, and theoretical and technical
research in order to address the complexities of urban regeneration. These acts combine
into strategies that highlight and influence the ways that Lambeth produces knowledge
of Cressingham and then acts on its buildings and residents. I created one strategy, the
Service Charge Parser, to support resident efforts to contest over £, of historic
repairs on Cressingham. However, before I discuss the Parser, it is important to provide
some context and introduce Lambeth's databases as more than a technological concern.

 In , officers cited widespread structural issues across Cressingham’s  homes
– which can be roughly divided into  council tenants,  homeowners, and  prop-
 erties that have been left empty or in a state of disrepair since . Officers, however,
 provided no evidence of major structural problems, so residents pushed for a survey
 of all buildings. However, an eventual % survey of buildings highlighted that poor
 maintenance was a primary cause of concern. This led residents to mistrust statements
 from officers and ward councillors. Indeed, even a judge stated she ‘felt uneasy’ about
 financial information presented by Lambeth.




     and Irish Legal Information Institute (BAILI),  November , www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/
     Admin//.html, para .


In , a Lambeth Labour Party manifesto pledge to build , council homes in the
borough prompted plans to build  homes in place of Cressingham's . However,
of these additional  homes, the majority are for high-value private sale or rent, with
only  targeted for council rents. In other words, Lambeth's proposals primarily feed
a private housing market – a germane point considering officers have kept around 
council homes on Cressingham empty since  while they progress their plans.

Lambeth's consultation excludes those without time or expertise to participate. Contrib-
utors to the Save Cressingham campaign (henceforth @SaveCressingham), for instance,
have attended consultation workshops, given speeches at cabinet meetings, held march-
es, submitted over  Freedom of Information Act requests, assessed complex financial
documents, and instigated two judicial reviews (won one, lost one), and developed alter-
natives to demolition. The effort to understand and influence a multitude of technical,
legislative, democratic, and party political processes is immense, yet Lambeth's decision
to demolish Cressingham stills stands.

In the UK, affordability and access to housing is a pressing social issue, though gov-
ernment proposals to address these problems through urban regeneration led by pri-
vate investors or local authorities have proved highly controversial. The  Grenfell
Tower fire tragedy brought the democratic and deliberative practices of central and
local government into sharp focus, as did long-running housing campaign groups such





as @SaveCressingham, Focus E mums, and the Southwark Notes. Central to these
practices are database technologies used in the management of council housing stock.
Such databases, however, are unacknowledged, poorly understood, and mostly invisible
and inaccessible to residents.

Artist and Activist Research

I devised strategies of artist and activist led research (henceforth research) to engage
with the democratic, ethical, material, and intrapersonal implications of Lambeth's data-
base technologies. My approach finds its root within a Critical Technical Practice pro-
posed by the computer scientist turned theorist Phil Agre  and further developed within
Goldsmiths University of London Cultural Studies department between −.

My research draws from all aspects of my life: artist, activist, programmer, academic,
husband, father, and resident facing the demolition of my home. As such, I identify each
site as a valid location of research to provide different registers, or modes of reasoning,
to consider how a world underwritten by data management technologies changes how
I think and act. Importantly, I hold acts of theoretical research, making, programming,
and activism in equal measure.

The technical register elucidates what the relational database does, which is a particular
type of database used in Lambeth. In his landmark s paper, E.F Codd is considered
to have produced the first formal definition of the relational database, known as the
relational model. The relational model introduced an abstract three-layer database archi-
tecture that separates how data is stored (internal), a database is structured (conceptual),
and data is viewed (external). Codd's aspiration that '[f]uture users of large data banks
must be protected from having to know how the data is organized in the machine' now
means that non-technical users can work with databases.

These abstract technical descriptions seem far removed from the management of a
social housing estate such as Cressingham. However, these details produce particular
arrangements of humans, computational machinery, and work environments. The rela-
tional model allows a Graphical User Interface (GUI) to access remote data-storage via
database queries (a programming language called SQL) that can retrieve, sort, update, or
delete data. A database schema describes a predictable structure for SQL to operate on
in the form of tables, columns, data-types, and primary keys. These components mean
that humans in Lambeth can simultaneously access the same data-set from any location
with a network connection. Put another way, Lambeth's housing and other services are
organized around an abstract relational model.




The edges of Lambeth's databases are not clear because they are abstract, spatially
distributed, operate through network infrastructure, and have changing sets of associa-
tions. Lambeth's primary housing database Northgate, for instance, manages the work of
surveyors, contractors, officers, and call-centre staff in multiple locations across London
and the UK. As such, Northgate is distributed across multiple hand-held devices, laptops,
desktop computers, and servers. Furthermore, Northgate connects with stock condition
and document databases in Lambeth, while also referencing the Land Registry and
Ordnance Survey databases of central government. These associations make Northgate
and other databases a difficult beast to figure.

Arts techniques, such as the montage in fig. , introduce an important register to address
the ambiguous layers and associations of database systems. I coined the fictional title
and acronym Housing Asset Repairs Management Systems (HARMS), to account for
anything that felt (an intrapersonal observation) part of a database. HARMS was inspired
by my art project Aristotle's Office that employed the acronym OAP to describe a hidden
communication protocol between technical objects of a certain age. HARMS resonates
with the call of software studies scholars Matthew Fuller and Andrew Goffey to consider
the evil in administrative technologies and also with Adrian Mackenzie's observation
that technologies are difficult to codify, symbolize, or quantify. In essence, HARMS acts
as a reminder, with intentional black humor, that databases can cause misery, distress,
and have ambiguous associations.







Philosophical theories of technology provide another register. The French philosopher Gilbert
Simondon's  concept of a technical object articulates Lambeth's databases as evolving
process with many components, rather than a static entity. Simondon's reformulation of what
a technical object is better articulates HARMS than any technical diagram I have attempted to
make (fig. ). Furthermore, Simondon's concept of technicity helps articulate how components
of Lambeth's databases have technical characteristics (their technicity) that governs what they
and other components can do. The artist and theorist Graham Harwood draws from Simon-
don in his concept of a relational machine to describe the collective endeavor of humans and
machines to systematically gather information. Here, Harwood recognizes humans as integral
components of a database, and in doing so, introduces a radically expanded understanding of
what a database is comprised of.

While it might seem strange to consider humans as components of machines, it is typical to
describe ourselves as cogs within corporate or political machines. It is this sensibility that I apply
to officers, contractors, and councillors, that all mediate how HARMS operates. Put another way,
human-technical components of HARMS combine into a juggernaut of urban regeneration that
appears hell-bent on the destruction of homes and community – a demolition machine that rides
roughshod over the lives of Cressingham residents.

The components of HARMS collectively produce knowledge of Cressingham while acting on
buildings and residents. Here, the French philosopher Michel Foucault's concept of power/
knowledge helps articulates this as a process of displacement and transposition or, drawing from


Harwood, as a kind of performance of power/knowledge. Crucially, power/knowledge questions
an understanding of power as something that can be held by those in positions of authority.
Instead, power/knowledge considers how the components of HARMS collectively mediate the
ways that specific configurations of power and knowledge come into being. Here, strategies of
making and thinking with Lambeth's databases reveal how this performance plays out through
the homes and lives of us Cressingham residents.

The Service Charge Parser

In computing terms, to parse something is to analyze text into logical syntactic elements. When
I read my service charge statement (henceforth bill), it is an act of parsing, of breaking it down
so that the processes and components that created it can more easily be understood. Living for
many years at Cressingham, I, like most other residents, paid these bills without question. The
charges felt about right, so we did not notice the details. However, as our bills started to rise
and the quality of repairs reduced, we paid more attention. Residents felt a shift in HARMS as
it transformed from a machine of repair to one of demolition.

My bill is a material manifestation of one or more databases within Lambeth (see fig. ). As such,
working with this bill provides insight into an otherwise hidden database schema and the technic-
ity of the relational database. The bill lists repairs to my block, displaying terms such as Block Def,
Job Number, Work Order Type, Job Details, Issue Date, and Completed. These terms reference
the structure of an inaccessible database with primary-keys that define a unique reference for
specific rows of data. This reference system provides the basis of the many-to-many relationships
(any row can refer to any other) that are are the defining characteristic of the relational model.










As a primary-key, Job Numbers wield a surprising amount of power/knowledge. Each Job Number
identifies a row of data with references to other tables or databases. These references include
Schedule of Rates (SOR) codes, which, as I discovered through a conversation with a contractor,
define agreed costs between contractors and Lambeth (see fig. ). When staff create a new job
on Northgate, they select a Job Type (e.g. drain, brickwork) from a list that defines a relationship
between Job Numbers and SOR codes. These many-to-many relations connect officers, contracts,
contractors, residents, and their homes. That is to say, primary-keys establish relationships both
inside and outside the technological confines of the database.

Many-to-many relations within Lambeth's databases are connected to ethical decisions to demol-
ish peoples homes. For example, a count of Job Numbers associated with Cressingham (Estate
ID EA) and drainage repairs (SOR's GRD, GRD, GRD, GRD, GRD) can
indicate a high number of drainage issues. However, it is easy to forget that such representa-
tions can be misleading. During a repairs tribunal, for example, a housing officer confirmed that
a majority of drainage issues on Cressingham should have been the responsibility of Thames
Water, which inflated Lambeth's repairs costs. Notably, it took years of resident effort and then
legal proceedings to contest this data, which questions the validity of a democratic process that
is shaped by such metrics.

The successful challenge of a bill requires the situated and expert knowledge of residents and
others. To this end, leaseholders on Cressingham hold annual meetings to jointly read our repair
bills. At one meeting, a quantity surveyor taught us to recognize common mistakes in data and
tactics by contractors to inflate repair costs. With these new skills, we identified around 
repairs that lacked sufficient detail to warrant payment, had been charged for twice, had not
been claimed on insurance, or were not completed. These issues prompted the group to inspect
every suspect repair job, which is no small task.

A computational process optimizes the ways that I and others can work with data. It can take days
of effort to copy data from multiple bills into a spreadsheet. As such, my background as a pro-
grammer prompted me to automate and optimize this process. I used the Python programming
language to scan paper documents or convert each page of a PDF (Portable Document Format)
bill into a series of JPG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) images. The code employs Computer
Vision techniques to identify separate fields of data based on their location. Then Optical Char-
acter Recognition machine-encodes these image-locations into strings of text. Finally, the code
combines these text strings into singles lines appended to a CSV (Comma Separated Value) file.

The relational model shifts the labour of inspecting repairs from housing officers to residents. It
also shifts associated power/knowledge dynamics. The completed field of my bill, for instance,
triggered my investigation into Lambeth's quality assurance methods, revealing officers only
inspect % of repairs. Here, the completed field works as a binary marker to monitor repairs
and indicates a permissions structure where contractors can mark their own work as satisfactory
and complete. Residents, however, have no such permissions except through a long-winded
call-centre and complaints process that, in my experience, effects little change.

The Service Charge Parser is a human-technical process that creates new possibilities of
association and action. The code, for example, generates a CSV file that can be read by
spreadsheet software, where previously PDF or paper documents could not. The new format
means that residents can add items to an ever-expanding list and perform calculations on
costs. These additional affordances alter how and where people can work with data. While
these observations might seem banal and everyday, they highlight how components of HARMS
like PDFs slow down and exhaust residents into inaction, while reformatting data into CSV files,
for instance, equips and energizes them.

Banal acts of categorization produce an asymmetry of power/knowledge that privileges one group
over another. Creating the Service Charge Parser, for example, produced a startling realization.
While I visually inspected repairs on Cressingham, tenants informed me that they did not receive
service charge statements because repair costs are included in their rental payments. Further-
more, because this data identifies individuals and their homes, Lambeth refuses to provide this
information via FOI requests. This means that tenants are at a disadvantage because, unlike
leaseholders, they cannot effectively audit repair data.

Accelerations

The relational model is an essential component of local authority housing that optimizes and dis-
tributes the ways that humans think and act. It is difficult to imagine, for example, how Lambeth
could manage their ,+ annual maintenance jobs without a relational database of some
kind. However, while the relational model clearly helps Lambeth to cope with huge volumes of
data, it also configures layers of government, contractors, and sub-contractors that produce that
data in the first place. The  million documents and  companies of interest identified by
police in their investigation of Grenfell provide a clear illustration of this.

I argue that this relational model configures and accelerates the marketization of housing services.
The urban geographer Stuart Hodkinson describes this local authority world of repair, mainte-
nance, and urban regeneration as an environment of private profit-seeking cartels that have cut
quality and casualized workforces. This environment is optimized and accelerated by conflations
of database technologies, network infrastructure, and metrics that residents have little recourse
to alter or contest. Crucially, these metrics and data-structures exclude a lived experience that
questions the validity of both data and a participatory democratic process.






Acts of programming, activism, and theoretical research reveal a myriad of processes that occur
between a resident reporting a repair, a bill arriving in the post, and decisions to demolish peoples
homes that break-up communities. These strategies reveal how the sheer volume of information
that databases produce makes it difficult for residents to hold anybody to account. As such, it
is not enough to change individuals, legislation, or party politics to produce a more safe and
egalitarian version of urban regeneration. Rather, we must also change the technical systems
and our symbiotic relationship to them to produce different outcomes.

Keene, Tom and Kypros Kyprianou. Aristotle's Office, in Seal, A. with S. Keene and J. Bowen (eds) EVA
London : Electronic Visualisation  the Arts. Proceedings of a conference held in London - July
Lambeth Council. Homes For Lambeth Business Plan, , http://estateregeneration.lambeth.gov.uk/
business_plan__.
Lambeth Council. Investing in Better Neighbourhoods and Building the Homes we Need to House the
People of Lambeth - Cressingham Gardens Estate, , https://moderngov.lambeth.gov.uk/documents/
s/Cabinet%Report%-%March%%v.pdf.
Lambeth Labour Party. Lambeth Labour Manifesto, , http://dnaprovhmx.cloudfront.net/
labourclp/pages//attachments/original//LambethLabourManifesto.pdf
Mackenzie, Adrian. Wirelessness: Radical Empiricism in Network Cultures, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, .
Simondon, Gilbert. On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects, trans. by Cecile. Malaspina and John
Rogove, Minneapolis: Univocal Pub, .
Tall Consulting Structural Engineers. Cressingham Gardens Estate Structural Report, , www.whatdo-
theyknow.com/request//response//attach//Cressingham%Gardens.pdf.

  Destandardizing
       Design?
   Learning from
   Critical Users

      Deanna Herst
                             ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                           




       DESTANDARDIZING DESIGN? LEARNING FROM
                  CRITICAL USERS

                                         DEANNA HERST

    The stakes are high. The next generation of engineering prosthetics can't only be in
    high-tech innovation and technology. Building a desirable future depends on multiple
    voices and varied forms of expertise. It depends on engineering with unlikely people,
    with unlikely things, and with an expansive view.

    - Sara Hendren and Caitrin Lynch, Unlikely Engineering Manifesto

The Unlikely Engineering Manifesto by designer Sara Hendren and anthropologist Caitrin Lynch
resulted from 'Engineering at Home', an initiative from a woman called Cindy, who became a
quadruple amputee after a heart attack. Unable to perform simple everyday life tasks, like eating
a sandwich or applying makeup, Cindy decided to make her own adaptations to her utensils.
She self-engineered tools like a hand cream jar opener and a device to hold scissors, resulting
in a repository of add-ons for her personal habits and daily routines.

These unlikely, quirky objects implicitly represent her frustration towards standard medical prod-
ucts that provided insufficient support for her practical needs. Contributing to her story, Hendren
and Lynch published the Unlikely Engineering Manifesto. It is a call for engineers and designers
of medical products to rethink systems, workflows, and standards in order to develop devices
that respond to the real needs of individuals with disabilities. From a human focused perspective,
their view questions processes that are predominantly technologically driven. For this reason, the
manifesto calls for interdisciplinary collaborations with professionals from fields like anthropology
and – not least – with the users of these technologies.

Frustrating Designs, Unruly Use(r)s

Whether in health care or other sectors, mass-produced products for people with disabilities
often fail to meet the diversity and complexity of the user's needs. In some cases, adapted
designs signal 'otherness' too explicitly, risking stigmatization. IKEA's initiative ThisAbles, for
example, targets people with 'special needs' with unambiguously titled add-ons like 'cane
by me' or 'easy handle'. Addressing such a complex group as universal, with standard
solutions for all, overlooks the core of the problem: the lack of diversity in needs, gestures,
movements, and habits.

How can we destandardize design for those people – people with disabilities, for instance –
who are not catered to by universal industrial norms? Is it possible to develop products for



individuals in a mass-market economy? What could be the role of making and self-production
for health care? Engineering at Home shows the potential of a critical user. Cindy's intimate,
unruly looking tools reflect her private routines and embody her tacit critical response towards
frustrating mass-produced products. Could Cindy be called a critical maker? According to
Mark Ratto, 'critical making shares an emphasis on "values" with both critical design and
other critical practices – such as the critical technical practice from which it derives as well
as value-sensitive design and values-in-design'. Looking at this project through the lens of
values in Critical Making, Cindy represents a specific position. Her role as a maker is insep-
arably intertwined with her position as a critical user. As such, she is an expert in evaluating
the ergonomics of her utensils and in adapting them to her own values, necessities, and
experiences. Cindy's case shows the urgency of including a critical user's perspective in prod-
uct development in order to adequately respond to the real needs of individuals with disabilities.

HUB: the Critical User as Self-fabricator

 How can we position the critical user in the process of destandardizing design? Could
 unlikely processes and unruly looking products replace universal standards in mass-pro-
 duced health care products? In the Human Unification Base (HUB) project, we apply
 these questions to the field of self-health care. We look at the role of the critical-us-
er-as-maker, as an extended, more specific version of the critical maker. Especially within
 the context of people with disabilities, we feel this inclusive perspective is indispensable
 in Critical Making. Ratto discusses the significance of inclusivity related to how 'work-
 ing-class people' and 'rural people' work with technology: 'We should be thinking about
 how that should be valued within critical making or could be folded into critical making
– because if there is an important political agenda built into the maker movement, then
 that agenda should be made available more widely than to the cultural elite'.

HUB is an initiative of interaction designer Eric Groot Kormelink, who has been a wheel-
 chair user since birth. Eric became aware of his potential as a critical-user-as-maker at
 FabLab Amsterdam, where he developed a caterpillar modification for his wheelchair
 to increase his ability to access public spaces. Before that, like Cindy, he re-engineered
 his own utensils, like an adapted fork he uses every day for multiple purposes, because
 none of the standard tools enabled him to eat in a convenient way. However, his adap-
 tations are not merely functional solutions. They are derivatives of his profound needs:
 freedom to move around independently. His experiences in everyday life – encountering
 inaccessible situations in public space, transport, buildings, and other frustrating designs
– prompted him to initiate HUB.
The project in formation focuses on the empowerment of people with disabilities, explic-
itly drawing on the projects of these critical users.













This is of fundamental importance in times when the Dutch health care system is increas-
ingly withdrawing. Although the trade-offs of self-care – like redirecting the responsibility to
users – are debatable, self-care is becoming increasingly urgent. Coinciding with self-care is
the increased availability of digital fabrication technologies, allowing people to 'self-fabricate'.
But how accessible are these tools for people with disabilities?

In this context, HUB explores the value of DIY / DIWO making, open design, the realistic
potential of digital fabrication for this group, and the possible benefits of in situ prototyping and
testing. It aims to rethink health care devices and remake them in collaboration with makers,
designers, artists, engineers, care and other professionals by sharing experiential and techno-
logical knowledge. To destandardize design instigated by individuals with disabilities, we inves-
tigate a broad spectrum of scenarios, from the user's perspective to that of the maker/designer/
engineer. A future objective is to develop prototypes into real products, create new standards
and find markets. Each activity focuses on personalization, 'because no user is the same'.

The Ergonomic and Beyond

But what does personalization mean when we look beyond the obvious ergonomic needs and
try to unravel the question behind the functional solution? Flying wheelchairs, steampunk leg
prostheses, and Lego robot arms are but a few examples that show the imagination of criti-
cal-users-as-makers beyond the ergonomic. What exactly are values in Critical Making, whose
values are they, and how can we become aware of them? In HUB, we draw upon the Convivial
Toolbox by design researchers Sanders  Stappers, investigating ways to disclose these invisible,
unspoken, latent layers in order to make more relevant products, tools, or devices. We work
with open design, less from its technological perspective (how accessible are open source,
digital fabrication tools?) but moreso as a method to invoke the user's involvement. Our point
of departure is an analysis of former open design projects developed at the Willem de Kooning
Academy (WdKA) in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

One open design project is Blindly Organized, a system for organizing personal belongings that
transforms into a bag. Sophie Dirven's goal was to share organizing knowledge from visually
impaired people with chaotic-minded people in need of structure. In an elderly home, she
met a woman who was gradually losing her sight. By sharing intimate stories and observing
her everyday habits, Dirven developed a close collaboration, gaining deep insight into her
personal life. Besides the woman's functional needs, like distinguishing and organizing items
in a bag, she also discovered her aesthetic preferences, colors, and shapes. She applied this
to the design of a colorful, modular bag system and disseminated it online for adaptation.
Blindly Organized destigmatizes universal products for blind people: the specific needs from
a visually impaired woman have now been made relevant for everybody. By relating to shared
needs, she set a new standard for bag design: 'Because after all, everyone is blind in their bag'.












Uncertain Forms

Engineering at Home and Blindly Organized represent two different positions towards
destandardizing design. The first project originated from a critical-user-as-maker, who
used DIY-engineering to realize personal ergonomic solutions. The second project reflects
an open design process initiated by a designer who used story sharing to discover the
visually impaired woman's needs and values. In HUB, we focus on user driven DIY/DIWO
and open design from the perspectives of both the maker-designer and the user-as-mak-
er. Open design becomes essential in a context where products need to be adaptable to
meet specific requirements. To address the invisible needs of individuals with disabilities,
we investigate the aesthetic dimension of open design through the concept of the open
form. In The Poetics of the Open Work, Umberto Eco describes this as: 'The poetics of
the "work in movement" (and partly that of the "open" work) sets in motion a new cycle of
relations between the artist and his audience, a new mechanics of aesthetic perception'.
In The Fine Mechanics of the Open Form (), composer and theater maker
Dick Raaijmakers employs the open form as an approach to facilitate improvisation and
chance in electronic music. Within this context, he describes the open form as a critique
of the closed nature of technology and the closed structures of classical compositions.
Although situated in a different field, this closed nature is not unlike the mechanisms of
the health care industry.

Employed in participatory processes, the open form inevitably results in uncertain or
unexpected outcomes. As Liesbeth Huybrechts states in Participation is Risky: 'Since
participatory projects rely on the input from both makers and participants, they are never
finished. Their process and "final" form is inherently undefined, which may lead to a
feeling of uncertainty among makers and participants'. At WdKA we sought to address
this possible tension between designers and their users, experimenting with the open
form as a prompt for activation and interaction. We worked with the Surrealist cadavre
exquis (exquisite corpse), a playful system for intuitive collaboration in which a drawing
or poem is completed by others. Exploring this open system for collaborative making
resulted in unexpected outcomes, like a 'Frankenstein' cardigan from various patches
knitted by different people. The assignment Design Autopsy reflected a more radical
approach. Students dissected an electronic device, redesigned it, and gave it a new
purpose based on personal needs. This process of rethinking and remaking resulted in
unfamiliar products, like a steaming clock made from a rebuilt humidifier. In HUB, we
are interested in further examining the value of these open formats and collaborative
processes, together with their unexpected results, and the ways they might relate to
accessibility in health self-care products.



Aesthetic Provocations

Besides the open form, at WdKA we explored attitudes like confrontation and provocation as
tactics for story sharing in artistic research. Confrontation Piece is an approach deriving from
the cultural probe in interaction design as popularized by designers and design scholars Bill
Gaver, Tony Dunne, and Elena Pacenti: 'a means of gathering data about people's lives, values,
thoughts. Probes can be any sort of artifact (map, postcard, camera, object, diary, etc.) along
with evocative tasks, which are given to participants to allow them to record specific events,
feelings, or interactions'. The Confrontation Piece challenged students to test their prototypes
through unexpected interventions or unfamiliar objects. It was used in Secret Stories about
Hidden Local Crafts, an assignment that aimed to collect narratives from local craftspeople.
One project focused on forgotten weaving techniques. Students installed a huge public loom
at the local market, using this provocative form to incite stories about weaving. While the giant
loom succeeded as a tool for collecting narratives, these tales were less about weaving and
more about everyday lives. This unexpected outcome changed the loom's original function,
transforming it into a public storytelling tool.

In the next piece, we expanded the user-oriented Confrontation Piece with a more speculative
approach. Provocation Piece tests extreme scenarios in real life through a provocative design
that aims to unlock the hidden values within a target group. In an assignment about a future
Internet of Things, students worked with several interventions, from roleplay to proposing
alienating objects. The project Itranscom, for example, was aimed at future care. What if we
could get access to the thoughts of people who cannot communicate anymore, for example,
because of dementia? The student made a prototype of a data transmission system, a small,
flickering electronic object, which she used in interviews with patients. The object sparked
profound conversations about care, life, and death. It convinced one person to reveal her
fear around privacy, which became embedded in the final design. It is an example of how a
provocative approach enables designers to detect the user's latent fears – in this case, towards
unfamiliar electronic devices.

 In the projects mentioned, we used a speculative approach to discover hidden values and
 emotions. However, speculation was not addressed in isolation, as an expression of authorship
 or design for debate as discussed in Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby's work, but rather
 connected to real-life needs. Drawing on interaction designer Ahmed Ansari's inclusive view
 on design, we expanded the what if scenarios with the question how else. As Ansari explains:
'How else emphasizes a connection to current systems and structures where the principle
 project is framed not as an aesthetic, exploratory, intellectual exercise, but as a political,
 transformative, active enterprise'. Investigating this what if/how else scenario allows us
 to connect imaginative scenarios about desired futures with the real life requirements of
 individuals with disabilities.






The Imaginary in Self-Health Care

One of HUB's questions relates to maintaining the user's central position in the design
and making process. As Eric states: 'it is necessary that health care developers, design-
ers, and engineers postpone solution thinking and start investigating the real values
behind the obvious questions related to functionality or limitations'.  But what are
those real values? To find out 'the real question behind the need', we focus on the tacit,
non-explicit requirements of people with disabilities that sometimes extend beyond the
ergonomic. What could be the role of the imaginary in the exchange between user and
maker/designer?

Elaborating on artistic research methods, strategies and tactics developed at WdKA,
we propose approaches like speculation in real life, provocation to incite storytelling,
open-ended forms to encourage individual adaptations, and scenarios for unimaginable
futures. Some preliminary scenarios include:

The Poetics of Use: using different forms of narration to discover personal narratives, mem-
ories, and other personal responses to everyday life devices. One example of story sharing,
already discussed, is the Blindly Organized system for the visually impaired woman.

Stories of the Senses: investigating the role of the senses and sensory feedback on prod-
ucts. Which tactile, olfactory, visual, auditory, or taste-related sensations are desired or
missed in daily life products? For example, if Eric needs a straw to drink his beverages, how
can his experience of different drinks be enhanced through the structures of the straw?

Imaginary Interactions with (Technical) Things: an autopsy of inaccessible devices for
people with disabilities. What unintended gestures or habits do these discouraging
devices generate? How can we dissect and redesign the (interaction) design of a device
like a PlayStation controller for a smoother experience?

As shown in earlier projects, we expect unpredictable outcomes – objects or add-ons
that are quirky, unfamiliar, or unusual, but that nevertheless reveal more profound
preferences or emotions. Could these unruly parameters become future standards for
self-health care?

Radical Inversions

A more rigorous approach involves performativity and role inversions. What if a designer,
in a monitored situation, traded places with a wheelchair user to learn what it means to
live with a disability? Designer Patricia Moore experimented with this kind of experiential
research. For many years, she disguised herself as an elderly woman to understand the
seniors' everyday life.



Or what if the critical-user-as-maker were in charge of the design cycle, by defining the
rules, materials, technologies, and execution, creating an inverted version of Condition-
al Design? In this scenario, it is the user who defines the design parameters for the
designer, not vice versa. There are already many semi-finished works waiting to be com-
pleted, like Eric's caterpillar tire. As an unfinished un-readymade embodying personal
desires, it is a valuable reference. Similar to the cadavre exquis, an un-readymade like
the caterpillar add-on represents a starting point, establishing the standard for further
development by makers, engineers, or designers, and encouraging them to learn from
the critical-user-as-maker.

Besides role inversions and collaborative un-readymades, we also imagine scenarios of the
unimaginable: those presumably impossible inventions that critical-users-as makers dream
about. We picture cases like the flying wheelchair, intuitive guitar interfaces, additional limbs
that do not yet exist, or Frankenstein add-ons to make digital fabrication tools more acces-
sible. To realize these visions, establishing a network with a broad spectrum of experts is an
urgent first objective.

Conclusions

 Could critical users become proverbial 'game changers' and destandardize the health care
 industry? Departing from the role of values in Critical Making, for self-health care we feel that
 it is necessary to expand its context with the critical-user-as-maker, an expert referent and
 valuable storyteller who has experienced frustrating standardized products. As the Unlike-
 ly Objects Manifesto proposes, interdisciplinary collaborations between professionals from
 technology, engineering, health care, and anthropology are indispensable. However, to go
 beyond ergonomic problem solving and learn about tacit needs – the real question behind
 the needs – the experience and imagination of both individuals with disabilities and makers,
 artists, or designers are of equal importance. Borrowing from open design approaches at
 WdKA, HUB intends to further investigate the value of the imaginary in collaborative mak-
 ing, to discover the invisible, unspoken needs of people with disabilities. Working from this
 hyperpersonal perspective introduces parameters like undefined processes, unexpected
 outcomes, and unruly products. It is the goal of HUB to work with these parameters and put
 the critical-user-as-maker in charge of her environment; as concept engineers, art directors,
 or innovative inventors. What if subjective variables like unlikely, undefined, unexpected or
'un-ready' became the new standards?

Hertz, Garnet (ed.) Conversations in Critical Making. Victoria, BC: CTheory Books, .
Huybrechts, Liesbeth, Cristiano Storni, Yanki Lee, Selina Schepers, Jessica Schoffelen and Katrien
Dreessen. Participation is risky. Approaches to joint creative processes. Vol. . Valiz: Amsterdam,
Netherlands, .
Maurer, Luna, Edo Paulus, Jonathan Puckey and Roel Wouters. Conditional Design, https://con-
ditionaldesign.org/.
Mulder, Arjen and Joke Brouwer (eds) Dick Raaijmakers: Monografie, Rotterdam: V_Instituut voor de
Instabiele Media, .
Ratto, Matt. 'Critical Making' in Bas Van Abel, Lucas Evers, Peter Troxler, and Roel Klaassen (eds)
Open Design Now: Why Design Cannot Remain Exclusive, Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, , http://
opendesignnow.org/.
Sanders, Elizabeth and Pieter Jan Stappers. Convivial Toolbox: Generative Research for the Front End
of Design, Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, .

      Building Open
       Design as a
         Commons
        Peter Troxler
                            ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                           




            BUILDING OPEN DESIGN AS A COMMONS
                                        PETER TROXLER

The concept of Open Design has been embraced by numerous initiatives in design, from
furniture to textiles, from product design to social design since its in the ear-
ly s. Open Design has also brought a revival to openness and sharing in technical
domains such as hardware and electronics. Sharing design and production files and instruc-
tions has become an almost compulsory ingredient for projects and initiatives that aim to
convey a critical dialogue on making, producing, and manufacturing the things that dominate
the lives of st century city dwellers in the global North.

Open design has been proposed as the key ingredient to make and discuss circular products
in events such as the 'Open Source Circular Economy Days' and the 'POC Innovation
Camp'. Open design has become the preferred modus operandi for social design. Increas-
ingly, open design inspires the design and manufacturing sectors and their related institu-
tions. Premsela, (at the time) the Netherlands Institute for Design and Fashion, was a key
partner in publishing the volume Open Design Now. In , the Danish Design Centre ran
a program for designers and manufacturers to grow their business 'by going open source'.
Open design, and research about open design, have predominantly been obsessed with the
characteristics of open, legal frameworks that would facilitate the openness of design, the
control that designers would need to relinquish, and the open access to design resources
that everyone would receive. However, less attention has been paid to how communities
of multiple actors might self-organize in order to create, build, share, and preserve those
open design resources.

 In this article, we trace open design back to its roots and – by building on experiences from
 a recent open design initiative as well as research into open design practices – we relate the
'how to organize' question of open design to earlier theories of common, shared resources.

Open Design

According to Berlin-based designer Ronen Kadushin, open design employs two generative
mechanisms:

     Palgrave Macmillan, . p. .

      .   sharing digital design files on the internet under a license that allows re-use and
           modification of a design, and
      .   creating designs that can be manufactured directly from the design files without
           the need for specialist machinery or tooling.

Elsewhere, open design has been defined as 'design whose makers allowed its free distribu-
tion and documentation and permitted modifications and derivations of it'. This definition
has its roots in software. Rather than actually defining what 'open' is, this second definition
sets out what the consequences of 'open' are.

Both definitions approach open design from the perspective of the designer as the author of
a design who resigns the exclusive authorial rights of making commercial use of that design.
Leon Cruickshank, professor of Design and Creative Exchange at Lancaster University, more
succinctly defines open design as

      models based on giving things away (free revealing), mass participation in design, co-cre-
      ation and a range of other approaches that seek to develop new open methods of creativi-
      ty [...] not necessarily based on conventional business models and a market economy.

Cruickshank's formulation adds two elements to the former definitions: the notion of 'mass
participation' and the idea of deviating from conventional business models and a market
economy. These two additions are crucial to the understanding and further development of
open design. However, the guidelines Cruickshank develops for designers, design participants,
and design facilitators remain restricted to the core process of creating open design. Questions
about building, sharing, and preserving of open design remain unasked – and unanswered.

Mass Participation in the Danish Remodel Example

 In , the Danish Design Center started an initiative to introduce open source principles
 to manufacturers as an instrument to develop new business models. It was aptly named
'Remodel'. Eight Danish manufacturing companies followed the program. Those eight com-
 panies came from a variety of industries: interior and furniture design, architecture, electronic
 devices and tools, but also food and biotechnology.

The program consisted of seven phases:






.   visualizing user journeys
.   drawing a community and system map
.   community testing of the approach in a hackathon
.   further developing a community
.   prototyping the (new) product ecosystem

A recurring theme in the Danish Design Center's program was thus the idea that com-
panies should involve 'the community' in their open source projects, a goal that corre-
sponds to Cruickshank's notion of 'mass participation'. The companies indeed developed
the desire, drive, and determination to identify 'somebody' (or some bodies) to contribute
to the body of open design(s) their projects were built upon. Their approaches varied
little, as all companies proposed some kind of online platform where variations of exist-
ing designs or new designs would be collected and exchanged in order to broaden the
companies' offerings and to serve customers with more suitable solutions. Companies
were split on who the participants of and contributors to these platforms would be – either
designers (three companies) or customers (five companies). Designers would contrib-
ute to the product catalogue of the company owning the platform, thereby expanding
its assortment, occasionally with the prospect that designers could earn royalties and
benefit from exposure on the platform. Customers would document how they adapted
existing products to their individual needs, therefore helping the companies to better
adjust their products to customer needs. What is striking is that both versions had one
aspect in common: the community, via the platform, would contribute primarily to the
business of the platform's initiator. Only two of the eight companies mentioned any
aspect of reciprocity in their proposals.

The Role of the Community

During the closing discussions of the Remodel initiative, a recurring topic was the idea of
platform and community building. While all the participating companies included a plat-
form where a community would meet in their proposals, they all struggled to imagine how
to implement that strategy. The obvious solution participants at the closing suggested was
some sort of community building and community management efforts to try to attract more
engaged people to the open design project in question. The corresponding instruments
mainly included attempts to make the community in question appear more desirable, more
difficult to get access to, and other nudging and social engineering tactics. Echoing the
absence of any reciprocity in the proposals, the obvious 'what's in it for me' question of
prospective community members never arose in the discussion.

However, as earlier analyses by IT management researchers Bo Xu, Donald R. Jones and
Bingjia Shao as well as work from design researcher Ali Gürcan Özkil have shown, the
large majority of open design projects both in hardware and software have not attracted a

large number of contributors, i.e. they remained relatively inactive and dormant., Indeed,
Jérémy Bonvoisin and colleagues at the French-German research project 'OPEN! Methods
and tools for community-based product development' noticed that even the open source
hardware projects with the most active communities showed substantially less contributions
than typical closed source, industrial projects.

Another study by business and innovation scholars Laetitia Thomas and Karine Samuel sug-
gested that successful open source projects in product design were community-centric. They
emerged initially from the community in order to solve a problem experienced by the very
same community. The community itself grew by attracting more talent to solve the problem.

Community-based Business Models

Indeed, in a previous study I co-authored with Patricia Wolf, we pointed out that it is import-
ant to differentiate between community-oriented and community-based business models.
Community-oriented models aim to extend a central firm's business model by interacting
with a 'community' that typically consists of user-client-stakeholders, but these models suffer
from the friction between the business imperative of maximizing profits and the community
values of sharing and altruism.

In that multiple case-study, we analyzed the business models of digital maker-entrepre-
neurs. Digital maker-entrepreneurs are people who create designs digitally, share them on
online platforms such as Thingiverse, employ digital manufacturing technologies such as D
printing to produce them, and generally use these technologies as a generative mechanism
for their entrepreneurial activities. We were particularly interested in the paradox between, on
the one hand, the freely available designs that are supposed to be reproduced with readily
available technology at marginal cost and, on the other hand, the people using those very
designs to earn money. For this reason, we especially tried to locate participants on the
platform who had built a successful business out of (re)using shared designs.

For the analysis we looked at business models as activity system, as suggested by manage-
ment scholars Christoph Zott and Raphael Amit. For the in-depth analysis we referred to





activity theory as a framework which again uses activity as a unit of analysis.

We analyzed three cases in detail: a web shop for D printed objects, a serial entrepreneur
in D printing, and a hardware engineer who introduced D printing at work and later
became an entrepreneur himself. The cases revealed that digital maker-entrepreneurs
specifically described both their customers and their suppliers in terms of community.
They also spoke about the relations within their firm in community terminology. The digital
maker-entrepreneurs mentioned notions of 'co-creation' and 'co-ownership' and made
references to community stewardship such as 'fairness' and 'reciprocity' – by giving credit
when reusing designs, by freely sharing their own designs, and, for example, by imple-
menting a revenue-sharing program.

These examples illustrate how business models emerge from the community itself and cre-
ate value for the community. Øystein Fjeldstad and his colleagues suggested three success
factors for such models:

.   actors who have the capabilities and values to self-organize;
.   commons where the actors accumulate and share resources; and
.   protocols, processes, and infrastructures that enable multi-actor collaboration.

In line with the findings by Thomas and Samuel, we found that entrepreneurs emerging
from such communities combined building blocks exhibiting altruism with building blocks
covering basic costs in order to develop new, hybrid business models. We also found that
those entrepreneurs employed novel governance principles such as reciprocity and fairness
to guide their business activities.

Communities as Stewards of Open Design

Through studying new business models and organizational designs from an actor-oriented
perspective, both our findings and Fjeldstad's observations point to new ways of doing


     stabilized procedures imposed on the activity (called rules in place), and the formally appointed
     functional groups involved in carrying out the activity which are produced by and result in a division of
     labor. For more details about activity theory, see for example Frank Blackler, 'Knowledge and the Theory
     of Organizations: Organizations as Activity Systems and the Reframing of Management Studies', Journal
     An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit, ; and Yrio
     Engeström, 'Activity Theory as a Framework for Analyzing and Redesigning Work', Ergonomics, .

business that are fundamentally different from traditional textbook approaches. In fact,
self-organization in multi-actor communities that build and share resources has been
observed before. In a paper from , Nobel Prize winner Elinor Ostrom described how
she had studied a large number of self-governed forests, fisheries and water-rights that
were called 'common pool resources' (CPRs) or 'commons'. Some of these CPRs were
successful at preserving the resource, some of them less so.

From her observations, Ostrom was able to formulate eight design principles that 'account
for the success of these institutions in sustaining the CPRs and gaining the compliance of
generation after generation of appropriators to the rules in use'. The eight design principles
are () a clear definition of a CPR, () the congruence of rules and local conditions, ()
participation in rule making, () in monitoring, () in sanctioning, () access to conflict
resolution mechanisms, () rights to organize, and () nesting of CPRs in larger systems.

It is interesting to note that open design has indeed been compared to a commons in the
sense of an openly accessible resource. Yet Ostrom's design principles rarely have surfaced
in the discussion. Studying open design as an activity system rather than purely as a resource
reveals self-organization in multi-actor communities that indeed care for a shared resource.
The activity systems we find in open design resemble Ostrom's institutions that sustain a
common pool resource – a commons – for generation after generation.

Relating this observation back to the questions emerging from the Remodel project, we
propose to adopt Ostrom's principles when creating, building and nurturing a community
as owner of an open source product development project. If we merely study open design
as a (passive) resource, we overlook the fact that it involves a lot of work, intentionality, and
self-organization in order to generate and maintain such a resource. For simplicity, our pro-
posal groups them into five, rather than eight, design principles:

      most directly corresponds to the suggestions of community-building mentioned earlier.
      to local conditions and to provision rules requiring labor, material, or money (). This
      point highlights what we referred to above as community-centric problems at the core
      of open design projects.





     sanctioning participants who violate rules, and resolving conflicts (, , , ). This point
     refers to the protocols, processes and infrastructures that enable collaboration.
.   Relative independence (minimal recognition of rights to organize). The rights of partici-
     pants to devise their own institutions are not challenged by external authorities ().
.   Nested enterprises. Appropriation, provision, monitoring, enforcement, conflict resolution
     and governance activities are organized in multiple layers of nested enterprises in the case
     of larger systems (). This is reflected, for example, in the digital maker-entrepreneurs
     who operated in the context of the larger Thingiverse community.

Conclusion

'What's in it for me?' For open source product design, this is the fundamental question that
 decides whether or not individuals will contribute to the survival of the project. In this article, we
 argued that the key to answering this question might not lie in what individuals gain from being
 part of the community (the resource focused, community-oriented approach), but to what extent
 individuals as part of the community experience and express ownership of the project (the activity
 focused, community-based approach).

(Re)applying the theory of the commons, we posit that open source product design projects would
benefit from an approach that transcends the level of individual bargaining. Instead, it would aim
to design a community around the project that can function as a commons – built with defined
boundaries, linked with local conditions, based on appropriate governance principles, supported
by relative independence, and able to actively interact with other projects as nested enterprises.

Such an open design project, as Michael Madison suggests, would result in a structured and built
commons 'with formal and informal institutional mechanism in place to manage or govern [the]
openness [...] distinguished from the unrestricted formal openness which defines the concept of
the public domain in intellectual property law'. Ostrom's principles help to guide the activities of
creating, building, sharing, and preserving an open design through mass participation. The very
notion of open design as a commons offers a valid solution for how to deviate from conventional
business models and a market economy.

Bonvoisin, Jérémy, Tom Buchert, Maurice Preidel and Rainer G. Stark. 'How Participative Is Open
Source Hardware? Insights from Online Repository Mining', Design Science, . (), https://doi.
org/./dsj...
Cruickshank, Leon. Open Design and Innovation: Facilitating Creativity in Everyone, London:
Routledge, .
Engeström, Yrio. Learning by Expanding: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research.
Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit, .
Engeström, Yrio. 'Activity Theory as a Framework for Analyzing and Redesigning Work', Ergonomics,
Fjeldstad, Øystein, Charles Snow, Raymond Miles and Christopher Lettl. 'The Architecture of Collabo-
Gavras, Kosmas. 'Open Source Beyond Software: Re-invent Open Design on the Common's Ground',
Journal of Peer Production,  (April ), http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue--open/peer-re-
viewed-papers/open-source-beyond-software/.
Madison, Michael. 'Commons at the Intersection of Peer Production, Citizen Science, and Big Data:
Galaxy Zoo', in Brett Frischmann, Michael Madison, Katherine Strandburg (eds) Governing Knowledge
Ostrom, Elinor. Governing the Commons. The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press, .
Özkil, Ali Gürcan. 'Collective design in D printing: A large scale empirical study of designs, designers
Smith, Adrian, Mariano Fressoli, Dinesh Abrol, Elisa Around and Adrian Ely. Grassroots Innovation
Movements. London: Routledge, .
Thomas, Laetitia, and Karine Samuel. 'Characteristics of Open Source Business Models', The XXVIII
ISPIM Innovation Conference – Composing the Innovation Symphony, Vienna, - June .
Troxler, Peter. 'The Beginning of a Beginning of the Beginning of a Trend,' in Bas van Abel, Lucas
Evers, Roel Klaassen and Peter Troxler (eds) Open design now: Why Design Cannot Remain Exclusive,
Troxler, Peter, and Patricia Wolf. 'Digital Maker-Entrepreneurs in Open Design: What Activities Make
Wolf, Patricia, and Peter Troxler. 'Community-based Business Models. Insights from an Emerging Maker
Xu, Bo, Donald R. Jones and Bingjia Shao. 'Volunteers' Involvement in Online Community Based
Zott, Christoph, and Amit Raphael. 'Business Model Design: An Activity System Perspective', Long
    ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY   




   Towards an
 Intersectional
    Feminist
Critical Making
 Krystin Gollihue 
  Abigail Browning

              TOWARD AN INTERSECTIONAL FEMINIST
                                    CRITICAL MAKING
                        KRYSTIN GOLLIHUE  ABIGAIL BROWNING

      Abigail Browning
      Across disciplines, it requires lateral thinking, transduction, relying on others for their
      expertise. Mirror neurons are a huge part of empathy and they trigger body responses.

      Krystin Gollihue
      The body literally mirroring another body in order to understand that body

This chapter tells a story, which Sto:lo poet and critic Lee Maracle says is the foundation of
theory. Story is how we orient ourselves – to our ideas, our bodies, our relationships, and our
selves. Many stories woven together help describe the world in full. Stories help create a truth
that validates individual experience, a concept that feminist and scientist Donna Haraway
terms feminist objectivity. This chapter is about our experiences with technological literacies,
production, mysticism, and the community we build with each other through technological
practices. Through a project we call [UJA], we argue for more differentiated places of critical,
cultural, and emergent making that come from our situated and lived experiences.

[UJA] is a digital Ouija board that uses an Arduino microcontroller and accelerometer to
transduce movement data into visualizations. Drawn from our own storytelling around the
Digital Humanities, critical making, feminism, and technological literacies, the project per-
forms our own relationships to technology as mystical connections. Through the touching and
sensing capacities of the Arduino, we trace our early literacy development back to the magic
of technology and the ability of storage media – as literary scholar and media theorist Fredrich
Kittler argues – to reproduce spirits.

The physical Ouija boards of our youth offered us a space not only to commune with others
like us without judgment, but to also control and engage with the unknown. By reconfiguring
critical making and technical literacy as a Ouija board – a point of reference specific to our
own embodied stories and experiences – we were able to return to a learning environment
centered on playful invention, relationship, and happenstance.

      Krystin Gollihue
      I just felt like I had discovered something entirely new that broke apart everything I had
      thought about what electronics were I was actually telling a student this - she saw me





    working and she mentioned how much she hated computer science in high school.
    and I said, ‘yeah, it’s definitely rewired my brain, and it’s been really hard, but I feel like
    I’m a new person now’. It’s like seeing your DNA for the very first time, it’s always been
    there, someone’s probs seen it before. But you, looking at yourself, it’s magic!

    Abigail Browning
    It’s empowering, and is applicable to all fields of study, and exciting to make some-
    thing and finally feel less helpless about the world around you



Finding Invention

In December , we began [UJA] with a talking-circle dialogue (see our Gchats through-
out this chapter) about what drew us to digital scholarship and critical making. The following
spring, we met for a brainstorming session using an invention process developed by cyber-
media theorist Gregory Ulmer called the popcycle, a heuristic that helps a writer identify
the ‘circulation of signification through the institutions’ of Family, Entertainment, School,
and Discipline. During the session, we composed multimodal texts that represented our
interpretations of these themes. What emerged were shared feelings of disconnectedness
within academic spaces – we exchanged stories of the ways infrastructures repeatedly erase
more personal ways of communicating and being.







Many of these early meetings were over coffee or food, where we sought tactical solutions to
systemic problems that were designed to keep people like us (femmes, artists, neurodiverse)
out of academia and out of technoculture. Our conversations sought a different system, one
that allowed for genuine and loving interaction between people who were never meant to exist
within the academy. We thought back to when we had experienced that kind of community
with our mothers, aunts, nanas, grannies, sisters, and friends. Somehow in our development,
love and curiosity turned into insecurity, where our relationships to things and each other were
recast as frivolous, distracting, and irrelevant to more 'serious' pursuits.

That turn coincided with what we described as 'tracking'. As teenagers, we were encouraged to
pursue disciplines like writing, dance, literature, and art as opposed to electronics, mathemat-
ics, science, and experimentation. As adult scholars, we have difficulty reconciling our curiosity
in the masculine-dominated discipline of media and technology with our formative activities in
more feminized fields. Outside of a basic technical proficiency, we had not been explicitly asked
to learn about the inner workings of the computers around us. But as graduate students, we
sought out opportunities to work with code and circuitry as integral elements of our identities.

Learning the circuit board and teaching ourselves the code to create [UJA] entailed one
kind of invention process, but our popcycle and follow-up dialogues was another. Combined,
they prompted reflection on the ways that our activities, whether disciplined or relational, were
implicitly technological. As technical communication scholar Angela Haas writes, our prac-
tices were digital, meaning of the fingers. For example, we followed recipes, learning how to
transduce materials into consumable items. We followed coded patterns to knit and crochet
blankets. We replicated technical processes of photography and film processing. We even
wrote poems that followed our own algorithms. These were the mechanics we knew. While
we honed our identity as makers through these conversations, we still had little reference for
our identities as electronic creators. Outside of socially-acceptable, necessity-born forays into
HTML and blogging, code was unfamiliar. The inner workings of a computational machine
were unfamiliar, but we could begin with a technology that we knew.

Haraway writes that as feminists, we must 'learn in our bodies, endowed with primate color
and stereoscopic vision, how to attach the objective to our theoretical and political scanners in
order to name where we are and are not'. Our experiences in academic contexts had erased
feeling as a mode of meaning-making, rendering us not present in discussions of early tech-
nical literacies. However, our attention to our embodied histories showed us how to intervene
into traditional ways of learning technology: we needed to create our own forms of procedural
literacy, intertwined with story, experience, and feeling.

In discussing Ulmer's 'Entertainment' cycle, we remembered a tool that each of us had intimate
and joyful experiences with – the Ouija board, a mystical game that we played at slumber par-
ties as young people. As an inventional tool, the Ouija board is a map created for open-ended


                           ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                               




questions that interfaces with the body. To speak with Donna Haraway's Cyborg Manifesto, the
game itself demonstrates how 'bodies are maps of power and identity'. Participation requires
an openness to the unknown, to taking joy (or sometimes fear) in what we cannot understand.
The Ouija board was a perfect analog to what we wanted from learning new media technologies:
a place for questions and stories, a place for curiosity, vulnerability, and play.

    Krystin Gollihue
    it's so good talking to you about these things.

    Abigail Browning
    hugs!!! this is lovely! xoxox

    Krystin Gollihue
    I'm glad we're doing this together!! <



Transducing [UJA]

To create [UJA], we used a basic Arduino board that is outfitted for several digital and
analog inputs and outputs. The input sensor was an accelerometer breakout board, and
the output was a compiled sketch using Processing visuals. The accelerometer measures
rates of acceleration, both static forces like gravity on a stationary object and dynamic forces
like movement, vibration, or shock. Because an accelerometer has both static and dynamic
properties, the sensory possibilities for [UJA] focused mostly on rates of velocity and g-force
produced from two sets of hands upon the planchette. We mapped these phenomena to
points along a spectrum, from the users touching the accelerometer but not moving it, all the
way to an extremely dynamic movement of the apparatus quickly across x and y coordinates.




cent to playful ellipses as possible visual reincarnations of the Ouija’s planchette ‘eye’, .




Once we were able to gather data from the accelerometer, we developed a Processing sketch
that would use acceleration to create visual phenomena on a screen. While we used this
program development to learn the Processing language, we also wanted to embody the
technocultural practices of a traditional Ouija board. Through procedural learning, we hoped
to accomplish three things: ) depict a space for play, uncertainty, and mysticism; ) tap
into the ways bodies interact with mystical 'seeing' objects like the Ouija board; ) create
a space that mirrored the kinds of community accessible to us in our youth and outside of
technological and educational institutions.

Paranormal Perception

Due to the accelerometer's extreme sensitivity, we could not 'learn' or 'predict' the movement
of the digital Ouija or the exact relationship between input and output. This uncertainty mir-
rors the uncertainty of paranormal activity that helped to create connections between Ouija
users; is it extrasensory perception, or is the other user creating some phenomenon, or is it
truly a spirit? We reveled in the idea of not-knowing or even the potential of never-knowing
(antithetical to academia). While these questions haunted us, we enjoyed existing in them,
just as we had enjoyed the thrill of the mystical Ouija board as young people.

In magical circumstances, we are both connected (to the unknown and to other commun-
ers) and disconnected (from our own bodies). Critical theorist Christopher Peterson writes
that our 'self-presence is predicated...on the nonpresence of others', but Ouija boards
indicate to us both a presence of other (the other users) and a nonpresence of other (the
spectral output). With [UJA], we experienced a kind of haunting that drew us together in
a sympathetic paranormalism. In , a few years after the invention of the Ouija board,
Scottish folklorist and anthropologist James Frazer wrote that 'things act on each other at a
distance through a secret sympathy' during paranormal activity. In creating [UJA], our
bodies were being acted upon through one kind of secret sympathy – our fight-or-flight bodily
response to danger – but we also experienced another secret sympathy mediated between
the two users of the Arduino. It was a direct analog to the ways the physical Ouija boards of
our youth brought us together with each other and with spirits in unidentifiable, mystical, yet
emotionally surprising ways.

Accidental Identities and The Body's Knowing

Through coding, we learned how to inscribe embodied feeling into an assemblage of technical
loops, how to map shared feeling and create new meaning. These intersections are meaning-
ful, because as queer theorist Jasbir Puar argues, bodies can't be broken down and sediment-
ed by their identities. Ultimately, intersectionality is not a thing, it's a doing: 'identification is
a process; identity is an encounter, an event, an accident, in fact. Identities are multicausal,






multidirectional, liminal; traces aren't always self-evident'. The process of using the digital
Ouija board disassembles and reassembles meaning through and without bodies. [UJA]
is an opportunity to visualize – not simply theorize – our partial, co-constructing narratives.

Because we understood how the accelerometer worked, we knew that our bodies would
create data no matter what. And because postmodern literary critic and media scholar Kath-
erine Hayles stresses that 'characteristic ways of sitting, gesturing, walking, and moving are
culturally specific,' we wondered how our embedded cultural knowledges would interact
with the output. If we could not control what was occurring on the screen using the digital
planchette, what was controlling it? The process forced us to grapple with the way that 'bodies
are unstable entities that cannot be seamlessly disaggregated into identity formations'. Did
the experience make us feel unsafe or unstable, as one might feel with a haunting? Or did it
make us feel curious, wanting more data in order to see what other phenomena might occur?

In creating a project that centered embodied, partial knowledges, mysticism, and technology,
we also created a space for feeling inside of academia. Notably, historian and cultural scholar
Dian Million describes the inclusion of 'emotional knowledges' as an important departure
from traditional White Academic historical accounts – this felt theory is one of the important
ways for telling the full story of genocide and abuse for First Nations. Further, sociologists
Jochen Kleres and Åsa Wettergren identify emotions as a driving part of rational decision
making, moreover, that 'one needs to "feel" the knowledge in order to be moved to act by it'
(emphasis ours). Our work challenges traditional intersections of coding with an emphatic
call for the visibility of 'local knowledges', such as feeling, as part of the technical space.

Making Unapologetic Space

Throughout the discussions and technical development of [UJA], we sensed the way space
was being constructed through the process of invention. Our contradictory selves experienced
the desire to participate in the technical culture of making – despite the academic barriers and
cultural pressures that aimed to prevent us from doing so. To even undertake this project, we
had to ask a professor to teach a separate, directed research course for the two of us (we were
lucky that they said yes). Ultimately, we needed to tear away and make a space for learning
coding. As Haraway explains, 'the split and contradictory self is the one who can interrogate
positionings and be accountable, the one who can construct and join rational conversations
and fantastic imaginings that change history'.



Throughout, we communicated with one another in traditionally 'feminine' ways, whether
emotionally through humor or through narrative as we developed code or visualizations. In
doing so, the space around us began to reflect the private and extra-institutional spaces
we frequented as young people. Feminist scholars Angela McRobbie and Jenny Garber
coined the term 'bedroom culture' to describe the places where girlhood as a subculture is
cultivated. Marketing researcher Kandy James's  study on teenage girls' bedrooms
found that girls overwhelmingly identified this space as one of the few safe, secure, and
controllable locations in their lives. While the bedroom is private and controllable, its
mirror image is the public – a harmful and unwieldy space and a constant affront to a
young girl's identity. This perspective relies on the privilege of having access to a private
space where a young girl feels she has power, which we were fortunate to have, coming
from white, middle- and working-class families.

Other private spaces exist at the intersections of other identities, however, and shed light on
how we might envision critical making as stemming from a safe place for learning. For exam-
ple, cultural scholar Carmen Kynard and rhetorical theorist Vorris B. Nunley have both written
of the private space of hush harbors for African American men and women. Nunley defines
hush harbors as 'camouflaged locations, hidden sites, and enclosed places' that transform
into places for free language, voicing what has gone unsaid, and 'sing[ing] their own songs
to their own selves in their own communities.' Nunley uses the examples of the African
American church and the Black barber shop, places where African Americans can hide in
plain sight and yet make meaning in their own vernaculars. These spaces were explicitly
created because enslaved Africans in the United States and their ancestors were kept out of
mainstream institutions. In writing of young African American women's hush harbors, Kynard
argues for 'enacting and embodying discursive spaces that teach working-class/working poor
people alternate gendered and racialized roles in white institutions'. Hush harbors, like
bedroom cultures, are private and controllable, a place for a person to be unapologetically
themselves in how they think, talk, and make the world. Hush harbors, however, are unique
in that they are historically and specifically African American spaces within violent institutions.

Bedroom cultures and hush harbors are private cultures that exist within public structures,
and might serve as models for the kinds of critical making that makers who have been
regulated out of maker culture are already engaging in. What kinds of critical sensing and
making of the world happen in the barber shop, at slumber parties, in kitchens, and within
religious ceremonies across culture and space? What reference points do they create for
critical makers of marginalized and intersectional identities? To imagine [UJA], we had to





reflect on its intimate creation of space between the two of us as users. In order to create a
digital Ouija board, we had to imagine a traditional one, engaging discourses and materials
that had created connection between us as young girls and femmes outside of educational
and technological institutions; these practices are central to our meaning-making, though
they existed outside of the boundaries of electronic making. These opportunities for safe,
secure making practices revealed the tensions between intimate, domestic, and hidden acts
of making and the educational publics that had judged our ways of knowing and being in
the world as unwelcome.

     Abigail Browning
     yeah exactly un/mediated spaces or un*mediated

     Krystin Gollihue
     I like un*mediated :D



Toward Intersectional Feminist Critical Making

Throughout the development of [UJA], we reflected on what about this project was
particularly 'feminist' or 'intersectional', not simply in content or message, but in method.
While our own identities cannot speak directly to the intersections of race, [UJA] allowed
us to imagine a critical making practice where makers could place their own cultural
practices within the frame of technical knowledge, despite those practices being deemed
extra-institutional, distracting, and unwelcome. An intersectional feminist critical making
requires us to welcome those kind of aberrations; procedural literacy in making involves
those stories, tangents, and personal reference points that aren't seemingly technical
or serious. Writing studies scholar Sarah Arroyo asserts that new media give us new
opportunities in 'welcoming the disruptions instead of systematically excluding them'.
Marginalized makers are themselves disruptions to institutional environments, shedding
light on the ways cultural, emotional, and embodied practices are systematically erased.
But our material practices – the ways we create in private, hidden, and nonlinear ways –
help recontextualize what matters in critical making.

Implicit in this discussion of procedure and distraction is what counts in the places we
make with technology. What counts as knowledge? What counts as technical literacy and
technology? What counts as making? For us, an intersectional feminist critical making
must reside in what happens at the margins: play, feeling, space, relationships, and the
unknown. This requires attention to embodied narratives: what makers experience out-
side of institutions, the pressures they exist within, the places they are kept out of, and
the practices they find familiar and safe. When we create spaces and contexts for critical
making, we must be asking ourselves what we are relegating to the margins and what
we are centering. We must create opportunities for more time to linger in experience, to



play, to focus on the personal and relational parts of our scholarship and creations, and
to forge relationships with others like and unlike us. An intersectional feminist critical
making praxis calls for us to create from our bodies, to invent in and with them, and to
value that practice as knowing.

Publications, .
McRobbie, Angela, and Jenny Garber. 'Girls and Subcultures', in Stuart Hall and Tony Jefferson (eds)
Resistance through Rituals: Youth Subcultures in Post-War Britain, nd ed., London: Routledge, ,
Million, Dian. 'Felt Theory: An Indigenous Feminist Approach to Affect and History', Wicazo Sa Review
Nunley, Vorris. 'From the Harbor to Da Academic Hood: Hush Harbors and an African American Rhe-
torical Tradition', in Elaine B. Richardson and Ronald L. Jackson II (eds) African American Rhetorics:
Puar, Jasbir K. '"I Would Rather be a Cyborg Than a Goddess": Becoming-Intersectional in Assem-
Ulmer, Gregory L. Heuretics: The Logic of Inventio, Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, .
  ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY   




  Hacking 
  Designing:
 Paradoxes of
Collaborative
   Practice
  Anja Groten

               HACKING  DESIGNING: PARADOXES OF
                    COLLABORATIVE PRACTICE

                                             ANJA GROTEN

 The concept of hacking is not discipline-specific; it is not exclusive to the field of computer pro-
 gramming. For this reason, designers and design educators freely use hacking terminology to
 describe design. The hacking approach implies a 'critical and playful design practice inspired
 by historical and current hacker, net art, "do-it-yourself" and "re-mix" cultures and practices'.
 However, I will argue here that this appropriation of hacking terminology by designers misses
 out on addressing the sociality inherent in hacking practices. Hacking seems enticing, holding
 out appealing modes of self-determined making. Yet if we 'critical' designers flirt with these
 modes, we also need to interrogate why hacking communities are known to be inaccessible to
'women, minorities, or other underrepresented groups'. We need to move beyond fetishizing
 the hacker mode of production, and instead investigate the convoluted social construct of
 hacking – including its frictions and dilemmas.

The Practice of Hackers  Designers

As a designer, educator and member of the Amsterdam-based workshop initiative Hackers 
Designers (HD), I have long identified with modes of hacking. One concrete example is 'Lev-
els of Autonomy', a workshop centered on self-driving cars in which participants hack remote
controlled toy cars. By repurposing the switches on the controls, and applying sensors and
micro-controllers, the toys slowly transform into miniature self-driving cars, which can follow a
line and stop in front of obstacles. The making process is accompanied by discussions about
the sociotechnical implications of the self-driving car. Modes of hacking in the context of the
self-driving car workshop describe foremost a mentality – a defiant yet playful attitude to making.

HD is not the only initiative advocating hacking approaches within art and design contexts.
Hacking events fill the agendas of many cultural organizations. For these organizations, hacking
is a way to emancipate users of technology from being passive consumers to becoming critical
makers. However, the implications of hacking remain unexamined in initiatives such as Hack
the Body, Hacking the News, or Hack Your Style.


      Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques, (): -. Also
      available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/_Design_for_hackability.
                             ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                                 




The experiment below posits a conversation between two stereotypes: a hacker (H) and a
designer (D). This imaginary discussion expresses my suspicions toward designerly approach-
es to hacking, and questions whether hacking could become a distinguishable and critical
form of designing. The dialogue is based on conversations and personal experiences engag-
ing with hackers, designers and artists. It also draws from anthropological studies of hacking
culture and more recent debates on the hostility of hacking environments.

D: In recent years, designers and design educators have started using hacking jargon to
rethink design methods and come up with new approaches for design. H, you are a real
hacker. Do you see problems in the appropriation of hacking jargon by designers?

H: I doubt designers actually understand what hacking means. Hacking is not a method you
can first learn and then apply. Neither can you conceptualize hacking by means of design.
Designers need to learn how to write, read, and fix code. They need to get literate before they
can call themselves hackers.

D: So you think designers only look at those aspects of hacking they can relate to, but ignore
the others? I would actually argue that designers' ways of making are not alien to the practice
of hacking. Most designers I know use hacking terminology as a way to describe a specific
approach to making. Isn't hacking a way of making?

H: Hacking might be a way of making. But it could be also a way of breaking. A hacker – just like a
designer I imagine – finds pleasure in creating. But hacking is more of an attitude than a practice.

D: I can see that. Actually I think it is the attitude you are mentioning that is particularly inter-
esting to us designers. Hackers seem to put forward a self-determined and sometimes unruly
attitude to making. You can apply hacking modes to a huge variety of circumstances. That's
why designers freely use hacking terms to describe what they do. Hacking is not exclusive to
one discipline, is it?

H: Hacking might be an attitude towards making. But this attitude is tightly connected to the
practice of writing software, debugging, running and maintaining systems, which is – and
this is important to acknowledge – continuously frustrating! Hackers are exposed to things
not working. The hacking attitude that is so interesting for you designers is a direct result of
encountering resistance, over and over again. Hackers have developed a tremendous tolerance
to frustration because we are constantly fighting code. It is the thin line between frustration
and pleasure that is important to understand when describing a hacker's mode of production.


     mostly on the basis of skills rather than ideologies.
 D: That hacking mode you are describing is in fact something I recognize in my own practice.
 As designers, we learned how to work skilfully and smoothly. We do things spontaneously,
'without thinking' so to speak, drawing on tacit knowledge. There are instances during design
 processes when this tacit knowledge is disrupted. The material or tool can behave differently
 than expected. That disruption might be pleasantly surprising, or unpleasantly disturbing –
 frustrating as you said before.

H: There is what is called deep hack mode, which is a bit different than what you describe.
Entering a deep hack mode is the ability to enter a state of high concentration. In any case, I
object to the idea of chance within hacking. Code is either working or not working. If it's not
working it means someone made a mistake that needs to be fixed. I might fix the code in a
straightforward way, or I fix it in ways nobody has thought of yet. The latter is called a good hack.

D: So the fact that nobody has thought about it yet qualifies a line of code to be a good hack?
Is it important to you that your code is recognized by others as a unique piece of work? Is
there a social pressure involved in hacking?

H: Hacking, as I experience it, is definitely a social activity. Although we might not often meet in
person, there is a general understanding amongst hackers that the technologies we are building
and using are created by a vast amount of other people. I wouldn't want to call this social pressure.
I want to come up with good hacks in order to contribute to projects greater than what I could
produce on my own. By the way, documentation is crucial for code to be reusable by others. I
always make sure my code is clean and beautiful before I publish it. If hackers like my code it
means what I made is effective. It's a compliment when someone uses my code.

D: Interesting. So coding is a social practice, but also an aesthetic one?

H: Certainly.

D: So there might be another commonality between Hackers and Designers. Hackers
too like to simplify and visually communicate through the work they produce.

H: I get it. You are trying to find out if the hacking approach can be useful across dis-
ciplines. You want to gain hacking insights in order to obtain a better understanding of
your own discipline. You know, I don't even care about your so-called design methods.
All I want to make clear is that there is more to hacking that needs to be considered.
Hacking is not a method. If you dig a little deeper you will come across complex forms
of interactions, which shape what hackers produce and how they produce it. You can-
not learn hacking like you would learn a skill, a subject, or a method. Hacking derives
from and contributes to an ecology. You need to be embedded in the ecology in order
to understand its workings. You designers tend to glorify hacking and forget about a
whole lot of dynamics that are at play in hacking culture. Hackers cannot be described






as a homogeneous group. There are many tensions and contradictions within hacker
communities. Some hackers make money, some are activists, some are criminals – yet
they might all work together on the same project.

 D: I'm curious; the sociality you are addressing seems to relate to what people call the
'hacker ethic' – a foundation for dealing critically and creatively with technology. But
 what you are also saying is, while hackers share a common ethical ground and work
 together, they also disagree and fight?

H: Yes, but they don't fight about politics. They fight about code and its principles and
I can assure you, they don't care about politeness.

D: What would you say are the consequences of the diverse intentions and motivations
inherent in hacking practices? Do you think that the plurality of different personalities
and beliefs enables a productive form of friction?

H: Well that depends on what you consider to be productive, and what is included and
excluded when you refer to 'different personalities'. Friction might actually be a core
characteristic of the hacker mode of production. But if you ask under which conditions
these practices produce code, you might find that these practices are productive only
for those who are resilient enough to expose themselves to direct confrontation. To some
people, hacking environments can come across as insensitive, judgmental, and hostile.
There are people who are either not used to such environments or who are not willing to
work within them. By only looking only at the bright side of hacking culture, there is a
danger of overlooking certain characteristics of a strand of makers who – besides their
many positive achievements – have also produced alt-right deviations and non-inclusive
spaces. Some say that these hostile environments make non-male and non-white mak-
ers, or makers above the age of , feel unwelcome. 'There are many examples that
demonstrate the hostility women face while working in online hacking environments. In a
hate-mail entitled "Death to Women's Rights" on the [Debian-women] mailing list, a man
expressed how much he despised women because they complain there is no[t] enough
women in male-dominated but successful fields'.



    beim schöpferisch-kritischen Umgang mit Technologie', Chaos Computer Congress,  December
    , https://media.ccc.de/v/c--hackerethik_-_eine_einfuhrung/.
 The term hacker ethic, when used by hacker communities such as the Chaos Computer Club, refers
    back to Steven Levy's notion of hacker ethic as 'an ethic seldom codified, but embodied in the behavior
    of hackers themselves'. Levy, Steven. Hackers. Heroes of the Computer Revolution, London: Penguin
 Ali Spivak, 'Inclusion Includes You Let's talk about How Inclusion Benefits All of Us', Mozilla devroom,
    Fosdem ,  February , https://fosdem.org//schedule/event/inclusion_includes_you/.
 Paraphrasing from: Yuwei Lin, 'A Techno-Feminist Perspective on the Free/Libre Open Source Software
    Development' in: Gender and IT Encyclopedia, Idea Groups, .

D: Right. I also heard about the recent controversy with the aggressive rhetoric used by Linux
kernel creator Linus Torvalds.

H: Torvalds is notorious for his political incorrectness.

D: He's been called out on verbal abuse and personal intimidation in his online communication.

H: After being publicly confronted by a female Linux developer, Torvalds was forced to revise
his 'code of conflict', which promoted 'no-filter feedback and bluntness as the natural and
more successful state of open source software development'.

D: Apart from the ethical dimensions, hacking culture encompasses peculiar pedagogical
facets. Hackers promote open access to information, unlimited possibilities for exchanging
knowledge, and the right to learn. On the other hand, confrontational rhetorics – I'm thinking
for instance of 'RTFM' (read the fucking manual) – mark another pedagogical dimension of
hacker culture: the importance of technical self-cultivation.

H: The confrontational nature of hackers' ways of communicating with each other is essential
to their modes of co-producing. Only by practicing a radical transparency and directness are
hackers able to express – through their work – their positions and along with it, their partiality
and omissions. They sustain space for others to confront them.

D: So would you say that the ability to work collectivity is so crucial that hackers will open up
the work they produce? How is this openness put into practice?

H: The constant state of exposure – and along with it, a sustained vulnerability – is enabled
only through constant and meticulous practices of documentation. Far from covering up
our bugs, we openly acknowledge and even explain them. We don't hide problems.  The
virtue of transparency is that it makes actions accountable. The community is built upon


      code-of-conduct-is-now-officially-part-of-linux/.
                               ORGANIZING OPENNESS: SOCIALITY AND COMMUNITY                               




social dynamics that are informed by frictional interaction. Those frictions mark hacker
culture. Through constant exposure to the possibility of potential disagreement and dispute,
hackers are constantly 'making and remaking themselves'.

D: I think I get your point. We can't talk about hacking without also talking about community,
infrastructures, and inevitable cultural codes. The paradoxes you described bring about
important frictions within hacker communities, and are crucial to an understanding of the
hacker way of working. These frictions don't seem incidental. No, they're actively made, widely
publicized, and openly negotiated. Instead of idealizing a hacker archetype, designers could
learn more from the dilemmas of this maker culture. This, in turn, might help them reflect
on the missed opportunities and weak points of their own practices. Designers should dis-
seminate their work in ways that force still-vulnerable processes to be exposed and possibly
contested. If we stop clutching so tightly to the paradigm of making 'convincing work', and
instead embrace the limits of our practices, designers could create our own ecology of frictions.

Lin, Yuwei. 'A Techno-Feminist Perspective on the Free/Libre Open Source Software Development',
Gender and IT Encyclopedia, Idea Groups, .'NMU, Guidelines for Non-Maintainer Upload', Debi-
an.org, https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/developers-reference/ch.en.html#nmu.
Rieger, Frank. 'Hackerethik – eine Einführung Verantwortung und Ethik beim Schöpferisch-kritischen
Umgang mit Technologie', Chaos Computer Congress,  December , https://media.ccc.
de/v/c--hackerethik_-_eine_einfuhrung/.



Schön, Donald. Educating the Reflective Practitioner, San Francisco, London: Jossey-Bass
Publishers, .
Spivak, Ali. 'Inclusion Includes You: Let's Talk About how Inclusion Benefits all of us', Mozilla Devroom,
Fosdem ,  February , https://fosdem.org//schedule/event/inclusion_includes_you/.
Stallman, Richard. 'GNU Manifesto, ', https://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.de.html
Statt, Nick. 'Linus Torvalds Returns to Linux Development with new Code of Conduct in Place:
Torvalds Took a Self-imposed Break to Rethink his Controversial Treatment of Others', The Verge, 
October , https://www.theverge.com/////linus-torvalds-linux-kernel-develop-
ment-return-code-of-conduct/.
Torvalds, Linus. 'Linux .-rc released, an apology, and a Maintainership Note', Posting to Linux
Kernel Mailing List,  September , https://lkml.org/lkml/////.
Vaughan-Nichols, Steven. 'Revised Linux Code of Conduct is now Officially Part of Linux. With the
Release of the Linux Kernel . Came not just new Features and bug Fixes, but the new Linux Code
of Conduct as well', ZDNet,  October , https://www.zdnet.com/article/revised-linux-code-of-
conduct-is-now-officially-part-of-linux/.
'WdKA Minor Programmes / Presentations ', Willem de Kooning Academie, https://www.wdka.nl/
 news-events/minor-programmes-presentations-.
    MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES   




Hacking the Hustle:
        Sex Work,
Networks,  Social
Reproduction Under
   FOSTA-SESTA

   Grace Van Ness

      HACKING THE HUSTLE: SEX WORK, NETWORKS,
       SOCIAL REPRODUCTION UNDER FOSTA-SESTA

                        GRACE VAN NESS




February th, . FOSTA-SESTA passes in the United States
House of Representatives,  to .

March st, . FOSTA-SESTA passes in the Senate,  to .
Reddit bans sex work-related subreddits.

March nd, . I purge four years worth of emails and
posts. Worry. Switch from Gmail to ProtonMail. Worry.
Reconsider purging my online accounts. Am I giving in
to fear? Am I falling into a trap? I scroll frantically
through Twitter. What is everyone else doing? I open a new
tab, scroll frantically through the Electronic Frontier
Foundation's *Surveillance Self-Defense* guide. I switch
tabs. Scroll. Switch tabs. Worry.

March rd, . Craigslist takes down its Personals section.

 March th, . Standing on the platform, waiting for the C
 train back to Brooklyn. I shove a pair of electric blue heels
 deeper into my bag and press the phone tight against my ear:
'Do what feels right for you. Do what feels possible for you.
 Do what feels safest while also being cognizant'. The voice
 comes in faintly through the rustling and clicking of linked
 cell phones on a dial-in meeting of hundreds of other sex
 workers. 'You are making decisions that are incredibly hard,
 and only you can know what is right for you'.

March th, . Microsoft bans nudity on Skype.

April rd, . NSFW files in my Google Drive disappear.

April th, . Backpage.com is seized by United States
federal authorities.

April th, . President Trump signs FOSTA-SESTA into law.

>_
                        MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                            



Scrolling through the journaled notes on my phone almost a year after FOSTA-SESTA
became law, I'm amazed at how far we've come for how little we've gained. As a porn per-
former, I revere the hard-fought battles for community, health, representation, and safety
waged by the fierce sex worker activists, advocates, and organizations in constant defense
of our rights. In a position of great privilege in the industry, the work that I do, while stig-
matized, is not criminalized in the way that other forms of sex work still are in the United
States. Determined by these conditions – as well as the simultaneous and intersecting in-
fluences of race, class, gender, and sexual orientation – the impact of social and legislative
change is experienced by sex workers to multiple, varying degrees. For many, and in a very
literal way, both their current and continued existence is at stake.
Increasingly, this war is waged in the cybersphere. Already practiced at appropriating and
repurposing as a means of survival, sex workers and those who trade sex within this new
dynamic and digital network continue to hack their means of social reproduction. Connected
through praxis and ethos to the intersectional feminist hacker and makerspace, but lacking
its resources, it is through a mutually beneficial crossing and knotting of networks that these
movements can both independently and collectively grow, adapt, and, in so doing, resist.

As an exploratory case study in the collaborative potential of sex worker and intersectional feminist
hacker and maker communities, this piece begins with a brief overview of FOSTA-SESTA and the
way in which it has immediately and drastically limited the capacity for the social reproduction of
workers in the sex industry. As context, the next section examines the history of the sex workers'
rights movement, establishing a rich, sex worker-led tradition of reclaiming and repurposing
the means of social reproduction as a form of resistance. This tradition will then be traced and
linked to current on- and offline technological appropriation by sex workers in direct response
to the adoption of FOSTA-SESTA. Drawing a comparison here to the practice and intent of
hacking within the intersectional feminist hacker and/or maker space (for brevity: IFH/
MS), the piece concludes with an inspired nod to Hacking//Hustling, a  tech-focused,
sex worker-led panel, workshop, and art show dedicated to knowledge exchange over a
post-FOSTA-SESTA internet.

FOSTA-SESTA and its Impact

Dubbed 'Frankenstein's Monster of a bill' by the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Online Sex Trafficking Act (FOSTA) and the Stop Enabling Sex Traffickers Act (SESTA) were
originally conceived as two separate bills intended to weaken the protection of Section  of
the  Communications Decency Act, which holds that: 'No provider or user of an interac-
tive computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided


     reproduction – as a necessary component of successful and scalable resistance is based in feminist
     Marxist thought. In this understanding – advanced by Silvia Federici and others – the 'means of
     reproduction' include not only physical necessities like food and shelter, but emotional and intellectual
     care, and emphasize the necessary collectivity of this reproductive process.

by another information content provider'. The bill seeks to clarify that this section of the
Decency Act, among other specifications, 'was never intended to provide legal protection
to websites that unlawfully promote and facilitate prostitution and websites that facilitate
traffickers in advertising the sale of unlawful sex acts with sex trafficking victims'. The result,
essentially, is that online websites and platforms can now be held liable for user-generated
posts deemed unlawful – whether the page owner has knowledge of the content or not.
Importantly, this mandate is also applied retroactively, such that all posts on a site – past
and future – are subject to prosecution.

At risk of seizure, lawsuit, hefty fines, and possible jail time, websites acted swiftly and without
warning to protect themselves from the broad reach of the new bill – many preemptively
censoring themselves weeks before FOSTA-SESTA was signed into law. While purportedly
intended to target abuse by sex traffickers, FOSTA-SESTA's notably vague language around
what constitutes 'promotion' or 'facilitation' or even 'prostitution' has led many platforms –
Craigslist and Reddit, quite visibly – to eliminate entire categories of content rather than
undertake the daunting, expensive, and imperfect task of sifting through and removing only
those posts in violation of the new federal guidelines.

Both before and during this reactionary wave, websites used specifically by sex workers to
advertise their services online at no- or low-cost – notably Backpage, as well as Nightshift
and CityVibe, among others – were shut down or changed their Terms of Service to prohibit
posts containing adult content. In the process, forums and platforms used by providers to
safely screen and verify clients, document violence and harassment, provide safety tips, and
reference peer-generated 'bad date lists' disappeared, resulting in the loss of an essential
resource and years of archived, life-saving content.

Many of the advertising sites still in operation are inaccessibly expensive, presenting a
prohibitive barrier to entry for many providers and endangering those already at dispropor-
tionate risk of violence and arrest: low-income sex workers, sex workers of color, disabled
sex workers, migrant sex workers, and trans sex workers. As such, while some providers
can pay higher advertising costs and cater to the wealthier clients on these platforms, more
precarious workers are forced to lower their rates and compromise their safety by seeking
clients offline.




      PLAW-publ.pdf.
      , https://theappeal.org/fosta-backers-to-sex-workers-your-work-can-never-be-safe-aef/.
                        MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                              




As Melissa, a Phoenix-based escort, makes clear:

     It's forcing me to go back to the streets, walking up and down trying to find clients.
     Now I not only have to deal with the police, but now I'm forced to deal with tricks
     that know this bill is in effect, and trust me, they are taking full advantage of it by
     being more aggressive. And unlike being in the safety of my room, I'm in their car, I
     don't have the option to leave or kick them out.

Compounding these effects are the prohibitions FOSTA-SESTA places on communication
between sex workers themselves. Instagram and Twitter – where sex workers gather, con-
nect, and spread news – now hides posts under certain organizing hashtags like #stripper,
and frequently 'shadowbans', suspends, or deletes user profiles deemed in violation of
site policy. While it should be enough that sex workers deserve to have a social media
profile like anybody else, these discriminatory measures constitute a denial of access to
knowledge and community. As explained by performer and author Jiz Lee in an interview
with Tits and Sass:

     Our best source of support is one another and at the moment that's done most
     effectively through social media. The more we're able to provide one another with
     information, to spread resources, give warnings, share recommendations, come
     together for emergency funding support, or organize political actions, the safer and
     more empowered we can be.

Relatively brief, this overview merely scratches the surface of FOSTA-SESTA's impact on
the business and lives of sex workers, as well as its exacerbatory interaction with existing
anti-sex worker structures. By restricting work opportunities through the elimination of
low-cost advertising, barring access to safety tools and online client screening processes,
and preventing sex workers from communicating with each other online, this bill limits the
already limited extent to which sex workers can freely work, live, connect, and organize – the
essential components of social reproduction and, thus, effective and sustainable resistance.

Though a daunting reality, instructive precedence and guidance can be found within the
sex worker community itself.


History of the Sex Workers' Rights Movement

As begins Melinda Chateauvert's Sex Workers Unite: A History of the Movement from Stone-
wall to SlutWalk, 'Sex workers are fighters' and 'have been fighting for their right to work, for
respect and justice, for a very long time'. Though sex workers have engaged in activism for
decades, Margo St. James is said to have founded the first American sex workers group in
, which adapted and applied feminist consciousness-raising methods in 'rap sessions'
and 'whore conventions'. Originally conceived as a safe space for sex workers to swap
information, COYOTE (Call Off Your Old Tired Ethics) soon expanded to include a bail fund
and peer-edited newspaper, provide legal assistance to workers, and collectively organize
against the racism and sexism of the criminal justice system.

 After the AIDS epidemic broke out, and amid mass media campaigns framing HIV as a
'punishment for their [hookers'] promiscuity',  members of COYOTE formed CAL-PEP
 (California Prostitutes Education Program) in order to generate funding for HIV research,
 provide counseling, and support sex worker-led education for 'prostitutes and their sexual
 partners'. This work led to CAL-PEP's publication of the revolutionary and life-saving text,
 Prostitutes Prevent AIDS: A Manual for Health Education, in .

Since COYOTE's inception, numerous and varied sex workers' rights organizations, advocacy
and community groups, and service providers have been established in a similar spirit.

There is the San Francisco-based St. James Infirmary, which provides 'free, compas-
sionate, and non-judgmental healthcare and social services for Sex Workers',as well
as The Red Umbrella Project, which focuses on rights advocacy through sex worker-led
storytelling and media activism.

Centering its work on the criminal justice system, SWOP Behind Bars 'provides incarcer-
ated sex workers with resources to create community links from the inside out' through
the implementation of a book donation and penpal program, the distribution of college
scholarships, the creation of study guides and newsletters for prisoners, and the Solidarity
Mobile Network – a mobile service for sex workers and allies, whose proceeds support
formerly incarcerated sex workers.

Supporting transgender sex workers, G.L.I.T.S. holds regular dinner meetings 'where our com-
munity comes to mingle and to be referred to secure health services' and housing, with the





long-term goal of creating a 'major housing facility for people of trans experience and trans sex
workers'. Red Canary Song, 'the only grassroots Chinese massage parlor worker coalition in
the U.S.', supports migrant sex workers through Know-Your-Rights workshops and accessible
chat groups. Also based in New York, the Black Sex Workers Collective seeks to create a 'safe
space where the unique experiences and needs of Black sex worker voices are validated and
responded to with appropriate needs-based resources'.

This selection, of course, represents only a few of the numerous individuals and organiza-
tions engaged in sex workers' rights activism and advocacy, but the ubiquity of a by-and-for
philosophy within the movement, as well as an emphasis on () the reclamation of health,
housing, and legal services tailored to the specific needs of sex workers, () the creation of
independent media and educational tools, and () the formation and preservation of commu-
nity through peer-engagement, serves to demonstrate the vibrant spirit of autonomous, social
reproduction-oriented organizing at the heart of the sex workers' rights movement.

The Sex Worker Response to FOSTA-SESTA

Drawing on the deep activist tradition of the sex workers' rights movement offline, once it
became clear that FOSTA-SESTA would be signed into law, sex workers were quick to adapt
and react to the intensified online threat:

.   Out of a desperate need for information, sex workers began meeting in person and on
     group calls, inviting other sex workers and allies knowledgeable in tech, journalism,
     and law to educate attendees on the implications of the bill and how to protect oneself.
.   Both online and at these meetings, lists of alternative advertising platforms and screening
     services – as well as lists of anti-sex work websites – were generated and circulated.
     These lists often function as public, dynamic, and editable docs where people can post
     questions, share experiences and news, and offer real-time advice.
.   Surveillance self-defense guides, how-tos on Tor and VPN usage, and step-by-step profile
     scrubbing strategies developed by and for sex workers – among many other technical
     education tools – were compiled and shared widely by existing sex worker activist orga-
     nizations. A long and tedious process, sex workers often met in-person to work through
     these digital security tasks together.
.   Large groups of sex workers collectively shifted their business accounts to ProtonMail, a
     Switzerland-based, open source, encrypted email service, and many now use encrypted
     experimenting with Switter, an open source project from Mastodon that describes itself



      as a 'sex-worker friendly social space,' as well as Hubzilla, a decentralized and open
      source forum-based space whose unique organization enables the 'revolutionary liberation
      of online identity from individual servers and domains'.
. Peer-led skillshares and workshops were organized in an effort to help fellow sex workers
      diversify their income streams, and many offered necessary services to each other for
      trade, holding free photography sessions or providing healing body work.
. Groups such as Bay Area Workers Support (BAWS) – which formed in direct response to
      FOSTA-SESTA – began accepting donations of cash and gift cards to distribute directly to
      any sex worker that contacts the group with a request for emergency funds.
These early responses to the adoption of FOSTA-SESTA, among many others, represent a
hacking, a repurposing of technologies by sex workers, for sex workers. By adapting alternative
communication methods both on- and offline, as well as developing and sharing necessary
skills, services, and resources, the sex worker response to this bill represents a reclamation
of the means of social reproduction from the cybersphere within the cybersphere – much like
the work of intersectional feminist hackers and makers.

Intersectional Feminism in Hacker/Maker Spaces

Largely in response to the discrimination, harassment, and lack of inclusion experienced by
marginalized groups in traditional hackerspaces, intersectional feminist hacker and mak-
erspaces began to emerge worldwide in the early s. Through the creation of the Geek
Feminism Wiki () and Blog (), as well as AdaCamp – an in-person unconference
held semi-bi-annually between  and  'dedicated to increasing women's participation
in open technology and culture' – female, queer, and POC hacktivists began to communicate
with each other, sharing experiences, ideas, and skills both on and offline. Out of this network
sprung Mz* Baltazar's Lab and Miss Desponias (), Mothership HackerMoms (), and
Liberating Ourselves Locally or LOL!, (), as well as Seattle Attic, Double Union, Flux (all
in ) and FemHack (), among several others.

Like the traditional hacker or makerspace, each of these typically autonomous and volun-
teer-run spaces provides supplies, equipment, and collaborative workspace for its members,
and many organize workshops or hackathons, as well as hold regular meetings. What's unique
about such IFH/MSs is that they are designed specifically to meet the needs and interests of
the communities they are by and for, thereby allowing for a truly revolutionary reimagining of







a 'different concatenation of social forms, knowledge, and technology'. In so doing, IFH/
MS members articulate a strategy of hacking not only software and hardware, but their own
social reproduction within the cybersphere. Two brief examples of this work in action:

.   Mothership HackerMoms was founded in  by Sho Sho Smith specifically to support
     mothers like herself who were struggling to embody the constructed 'perfect mod-
     ern mother'. In its Failure Club workshop series, HackerMoms present and discuss
     in-progress projects, acknowledging failure as an important aspect of achievement and
     eschewing the productivist tendencies of traditional hacker culture.As Rosner and
     Fox describe in their work on the Mothership: 'Failure, in this way, became a common
     cultural resource that members could use in the framework of daily life to manage
     their social relations and different realms of work. It was through failure that we saw a
     productive reworking of female agencies'.
.   Founded in , LOL! is a queer and trans POC-led makerspace in Oakland whose
     mission is one of self-determination and community power. The space aims to be
     a 'welcoming place for poor women, trans, low income, formerly incarcerated [...] of
     and for [the] immediate community [...] political education, social justice [...] freedom
     from jobs'. Rather than functioning merely as a 'training ground for work', here LOL!
     explicitly articulates 'an alternative value system [...] around technology and technical
     practice, wherein not only who participates in technological production is changed, but
     why and how people engage with technology is altered'.

In prioritizing community formation offline, as well as hacking and repurposing technolo-
gies online, the IFH/MS 'can allow us to develop human-machinic assemblages of social
reproduction – digital modes of communicating with bodies and technologies that enhance
the pleasures of being together, that expand autonomy, erode atomization, and challenge
capital's ongoing subsumption'.

The Hacker/Maker as a Cross-Network Ally

While both the sex worker and IFH/MS communities are engaged in a similar social reproduc-
tion-oriented means of resistance, unlike the sex industry, working in a hacker or makerspace



does not usually entail the degree of surveillance, policing, and discrimination faced daily by
sex workers. Yet therein lies the importance of cross-network contribution. In providing valu-
able technical knowledge and resources, as well as allyship, intersectional feminist hackers
and makers can do much to support sex workers in the fight against FOSTA-SESTA.

This collaboration may be exercised in finite actionables such as skillshares or the develop-
Open Privacy Research Society, Norman Shamas maintains that:

      Technologists need to consider what the implications of their design decisions are
      and ensure that their marginalized users are protected against laws like FOSTA [...]
      Surveillance and policing technology are often refined and tested on marginalized
      communities. By supporting their rights you are also supporting your rights.

Here, clarified, is the mutual benefit of resistance to FOSTA-SESTA. The bill, while particularly
and immediately dangerous for sex workers, has broad, disastrous implications for all internet
users – and particularly those in marginalized groups. In recognition of this threat, FOSTA-SES-
TA has been challenged by a number of tech activist organizations on the basis that the bill
violates the First Amendment. In a February  call-to-action for its community of tech
security activists, the EFF wrote:

      If you care about protecting the safety of our online communities – if you care about
      protecting everyone's right to speak online, even about sensitive topics – we urge you
      to call your representative today and tell them to reject FOSTA.



Hacking//Hustling

Evidence of the potential that exists in this mutually beneficial crossing and knotting of net-
works is Hacking//Hustling, a workshop, panel discussion, and community pop-up art show
held in Brooklyn, New York in September of . The two-day program of 'conversations
and tactical skill sharing led by sex workers' was framed as:

      [...] a space for digital rights advocates, journalists, and allied communities to come
      learn from sex workers and better understand the developing effects of SESTA on
      internet freedom for all. We believe that sex workers are the experts on their own
      experience and that an internet that is safe for sex workers is an internet that is safe
      for almost everyone.






The panel portion of the program brought sex workers and sex workers' rights activists together in
discussion on 'censorship, discrimination, and policing in the wake of SESTA'. Building on this
panel, a workshop was organized in collaboration with ttech, a group which seeks to empower
trans and gender non-conforming people to participate in the tech industry. The workshop
was designed for sex workers and digital rights advocates to work together on implementing
strategies to 'protect data, have safer communications, and build stronger online communities'.

Unable to attend the program, I watch a live stream of the panel, feeling excited, yet undeni-
ably anxious. As often happens when sex worker activists and advocates collaborate with other
communities, the specific needs and experiences of sex workers – particularly those with the
least institutional privilege – can become flattened and oversimplified, or co-opted toward some
alternative end.

As such, connecting organizations and movements across difference demands an approach to
collaboration that encourages multiplicity, honoring dialogue over unanimity. Often considered
inherently detrimental or a sign of failure, conflict which emerges from deliberating rather than
dismissing difference within a movement can do much to improve its efficacy and sustainability,
make it more accessible, diversify its direction, or – and sometimes equally beneficial – encourage
the movement to disperse and reform across time and space in radical ways.

What, then, might the rich and various formations and reformations of such a cross-network
collaboration look like? I envision the establishment of a sustainable, sex worker-led hacker or
maker space, a community-based learn-to-code program designed to the specific needs of
local sex workers, or a well-attended and well-funded hackathon aimed at developing solutions
for improved sex worker safety. I envision the creation of safe, adaptable, functional tools and
strategies made accessible not only to those directly impacted by FOSTA-SESTA - sex workers
with access to online resources in the first place - but to workers without that privilege. But, most
of all, I envision this visioning happening together.

What is imperative is that this collaborative process centers the input and experience of mar-
ginalized communities that the very practice of hacking can be hacked to serve. Regarding
FOSTA-SESTA specifically, if resistant technologies are not developed by and made accessible
to the sex workers who desperately need them, it begs the question: whose identities are we
collectively reproducing and why?

Breathing easy again as the Hacking//Hustling livestream comes to a close, I look into the faces
of the driven, knowledgeable, and radical sex workers and techies who make up the panel and
feel a touch of hope.

>_


http://melissagiragrant.com/hackinghustling/#resources.
 Grant, 'Hacking//Hustling'.
 'About', ttech, https://ttech-nyc.github.io/.
 Grant, 'Hacking//Hustling'.

Grant, Melissa Gira. 'Fosta Backers to Sex Workers: Your Work Can Never Be Safe,' The Appeal,
April , , https://theappeal.org/fosta-backers-to-sex-workers-your-work-can-never-be-safe-
aef/.
Grant, Melissa Gira. 'Hacking//Hustling: A Platform for Sex Workers in a Post SESTA World', http://
melissagiragrant.com/hackinghustling/#resources.
Harmon, Elliot. 'FOSTA Would Be a Disaster for Online Communities', Electronic Frontier Foundation,
February , , https://www.eff.org/deeplinks///fosta-would-be-disaster-online-communities.
Horn, Tina. 'How a New Senate Bill Will Screw Over Sex Workers', Rolling Stone, June , , https://
www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-features/how-a-new-senate-bill-will-screw-over-sex-workers-/.
'Hubzilla Documentation: About', Hubzilla, https://project.hubzilla.org/help/en/about/about#What_is_Hubzilla_.
Hugill, David, and Elise Danielle Thorburn. 'Reactivating the Social Body in Insurrectionary Times: A Dia-
McCombs, Emily. '"This Bill Is Killing Us":  Sex Workers On Their Lives In The Wake Of FOSTA',
Huffington Post, May , , https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/sex-workers-sesta-fosta_
us_adddebedcacbd.
Piper, Reese. 'How Censoring Strippers Affects All Women', Motherboard, May , , https://moth-
erboard.vice.com/en_us/article/nekgg/instagram-censoring-stripper-hashtags-reese-piper.
'Platforms Which Discriminate Against Sex Workers', #SurvivorsAgainstSESTA, April , , https://
 survivorsagainstsesta.org/platforms-discriminate-against-sex-workers/.
'Public Law -', April , , Congress.gov (the official website for U.S. federal legislative
 information), https://www.congress.gov//plaws/publ/PLAW-publ.pdf.
Red Canary Song, http://www.redcanarysong.org/.
                        MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                          


Red Umbrella Project, http://redumbrellaproject.org/.
Rosner, Daniela K., and Sarah E. Fox. 'Legacies of Craft and the Centrality of Failure in a Mother-Operated
Roux, Liara. 'Post-SESTA/FOSTA Self-Censoring for Twitter, Reddit, and Other Social Media',
#SurvivorsAgainstSESTA, March , , https://survivorsagainstsesta.org////post-
sesta-fosta-self-censoring-for-twitter-reddit-and-other-social-media/.
Schecter, Anna and Dennis Romero. 'Sex Trafficking Law Becomes Center of Debate about Tech
Responsibility', NBCNews, July , , https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/sex-traffick-
ing-bill-becomes-center-debate-about-tech-responsibility-n.
'Section  of the Communications Decency Act', Electronic Frontier Foundation, https://www.
 eff.org/issues/cda.
Selyukh, Alina. 'Backpage Founders Indicted On Charges Of Facilitating Prostitution', NPR, April 
, https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/////backpage-founders-indict-
ed-on-charges-of-facilitating-prostitution.
Shamas, Norman. 'A Brief to Fosta-Sesta', October, , https://www.genderit.org/
sites/default/files/fosta_zine.pdf.
St. James Infirmary, http://stjamesinfirmary.org/.
SWOP Behind Bars, http://swopbehindbars.org/.
Thorburn, Elise Danielle. 'Networked Social Reproduction: Crises in the Integrated Circuit', Triple C:
Tierney, Allison. 'Sex Workers Say They're Being Pushed Off Social Media Platforms', Vice, April
, , https://www.vice.com/en_ca/article/kjawb/sex-workers-say-theyre-being-pushed-off-
social-media-platforms.
'Timeline of Geek Feminism', Geek Feminism Wiki, http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Time-
 line_of_geek_feminism.
'Timeline of Incidents', Geek Feminism Wiki, http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/index.php?title=-
 Timeline_of_incidents.
Toupin, Sophie. 'Feminist Hackerspaces: The Synthesis of Feminist and Hacker Cultures', The Journal
of Peer Production, no. , October , http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue--shared-machine-
shops/peer-reviewed-articles/feminist-hackerspaces-the-synthesis-of-feminist-and-hacker-cultures/.

 ‘Placeless’ Making?
      Rearticulating the
  Power-Geometries of
      Digital Platforms
      in China Through
Tactical Co-Creation


         Kat Braybrooke
                      MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                          




     'PLACELESS' MAKING? REARTICULATING THE
    POWER-GEOMETRIES OF DIGITAL PLATFORMS IN
       CHINA THROUGH TACTICAL CO-CREATION
                                       KAT BRAYBROOKE




artworks that use WeChat to experiment with 'placeless making', screenshot, .

What happens when makers, or people who use tools to hack, remix and create things,
interact on virtual or 'placeless' rather than physical or 'locally situated' spaces? What
happens when they encounter other digital actors – the kind who want to control them?

In China, internet surveillance is an everyday reality. Through an assemblage of tools
referred to as 'The Great Firewall', the government monitors, classifies and censors the
digital interactions of its . billion citizens. This reality is by no means limited to China,
however. As governments and corporations alike realize the potentials of these technolo-
gies, internet censorship increasingly affects our digital experiences in many other places.

This article is about 數據線 Shùjùxiàn, or 'drinking from the data line', a creative exper-
iment with digital makers in China that was inspired by Furtherfield's DIWO (Do It With
Others) call in  for decentralized endeavours that would disrupt hierarchies through
networked collaborations.  By engaging in 'placeless making', projects like Shùjùxiàn
attempt to playfully subvert censorship algorithms through co-creation.

    refer to 'digital making', which uses digital tools and platforms.

Introducing Placeless Making

As place becomes more important to platforms, so does placelessness. By 'placeless making',
I refer to tactical projects that refuse to situate themselves, or situate themselves only tem-
porarily, within any place. Placeless making explores making as a conceptual and technical
practice and as a politics of material participation, supplanting local limitations with global
networks of producers. In doing so, placeless making aims to enable alternative spatial con-
figurations through material engagement.

From locally-situated hackerspaces, makerspaces and fab labs to the decentralized digital
platforms in China, digital makers work in many different kinds of spaces. By engaging with
these diverse arrangements, Shùjùxiàn aimed to explore whether placeless making could fos-
ter the kind of 'simultaneity of social practices without territorial contiguity' that Manuel Castells
first referred to in  when he spoke about the possibilities of renegotiating global 'spaces
of flow'. Shùjùxiàn opens up these possibilities by turning the geotagged environments of
corporately-owned platforms like Instagram and WeChat into 'temporary autonomous zones'
for new modalities of co-creation.

It is important to emphasize here that engagements with digital platforms do not necessar-
ily make it easy for the bodies of makers to transcend space and time – despite what the
consensual dreams of cyberspace once promised us. Over and over again, we have seen
how claims of digital emancipation are all too easily contested. In our current moment, place
matters more, not less. We live in a 'new dark age', where nation-states increasingly capitalize
on transnational networks of code, information, media and data – the very 'spaces of flow'
referred to by Castells – in order to entrench their domination. The politics of digital infor-
mation, meanwhile, increasingly augment our spatial experiences. Sliced into digital layers,
the stratified representations of local geographies on platforms like Google Maps critically
influence how we understand and interact with places.



      com/criticalmaking/.
      of information according to their needs, as proposed by Manuel Castells, The Network Society: A Cross-
      Cultural Perspective, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, , p. . The value of this concept is
      that in configuration, there lies a possibility for reconfiguration.
      Geolinguistic Contours of the Web', Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space , no.  (
                         MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                              




Tactical Evasions, New Possibilities

Despite these realities, there are still opportunities to playfully 'hack' the flows of hegemonic
platforms by rearticulating the logics of their creators. By refusing to locate interactions in any
one place unless absolutely necessary, placeless making projects carry the potential, however
nebulous, to challenge the entrapments of digital platforms. As the work of Zach Blas reminds
us, and Michel Foucault before him, surveillance states have always attempted to utilize the
newest technologies to identify, control and dominate their subjects. However, these dominations
are contested by what Blas refers to as acts of 'informatic opacity', tactical evasions seen in the
creative endeavours of myriad groups from Pussy Riot to the Zapatistas, who experiment with visi-
bility through 'carnivalesque refusal[s] of capture and recognition'. Resistance inevitably persists.

By tapping into the legacies of these traditions, placeless making can subvert the dominant
discourses of the spaces where they are located. Placeless makers can engage with two realms
of possibility in particular.

First, placeless makers can decolonize the local hegemonies of global proprietary platforms by
finding ways to exploit their 'hidden affordances', or uses that are not apparent. Here, the stated
intentions of platforms, and their embedded geolocational features, are creatively subverted to
address other kinds of spatially heterogeneous needs. In her analysis of the media production of
Black Lives Matter activists in America, for example, Chenjerai Kumanyika has discussed how
informal groups of citizen journalists used mobile phone cameras and platforms like Facebook to
explore the aesthetics of livestreaming practices in spaces of conflict. By deliberately geolocating
their own livestreams during protests, these portrayals provided an alternative to mainstream
news coverage. This strategy fostered solidarity amongst international networks of protesters, but
crucially it also enabled the exploitation of more vulnerable streamers by the media conglomerates
and platforms they interacted with.

 Second, placeless making can challenge the usual Western universalist assumptions of what
'making' itself constitutes by enabling exchanges between different kinds of makers working
 across and beyond the local limitations and spaces of difference, from jugaad makers in India



to shanzaii copyleft makers in China. The hacktivists of groups like the decentralized
Anonymous collective, for example, typically prefer their practices to remain placeless.
In the mid s, however, several members of the AnonOps group chose to work with
local collectives of village elders, indigenous language experts, and educators in rural
regions of Peru to subvert the 'techno-fundamentalist' one-size-fits-all software of MIT's
One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) laptops that had been deployed in local schools. Anita
Say Chan has described how these temporary transnational collaborations enabled the
laptops to be 'rescripted' so that they could finally be suitable for the local contexts and
languages of students.

The Limits of Placelessness

In making projects of this kind, the spatial interactions between individuals remain
defined by the limitations of the bounded territories within which their bodies and
national identities are located. An AnonOps hacktivist may be able to transcend her
usual spatiality by locating herself temporarily in rural Peru, but that does not mean her
Peruvian collaborators share the same freedoms. If she finds herself on the wrong side
of Peruvian laws, meanwhile, she may all too quickly lose her ability to build temporary
autonomous zones across the spaces of the digital platforms she engages with.

One way of articulating these limits is through the geographer Doreen Massey's notion of
space as an 'ongoing production' that is both material and abstract in form, emerging
dynamically from the interactions of multiple individuals, processes and histories. This allows
the many places that make up a space to be viewed as overlapping 'envelopes of space-
time' that are variably articulated and perceived by different people at different moments
in time according to the 'power-geometries', or social differentiations of mobility, agency
and access, that inevitably accompany their interactions with digitally-mediated spaces.

As we have seen in the examples above, these power-geometries, while often unseen,
determine the affordances of those who engage with them according to spatial circum-
stances which are out of their control. By engaging tactically with these concepts through
material engagement, placeless making is one of many efforts to negotiate this.




 Anita Chan, Networking Peripheries: Technological Futures and the Myth of Digital Universalism,
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, .
 Doreen Massey, Space, Place, and Gender, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, , p. .
 Doreen Massey, 'Power-Geometry and a Progressive Sense of Place', in John Bird, Barry Curtis,
    Tim Putnam and Lisa Tickner (eds) Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change, London:
                        MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                            




WeChat Stickers: A New Mode of Digital Making

I couldn't help but be preoccupied with these kinds of concerns while part of a research
project that engaged with different kinds of maker communities in Xi'an and Chengdu, China,
where the nation's dominant digital chat platform, WeChat, recently hit  billion monthly users.
WeChat at first looks like WhatsApp and other chat services used in the West, but its inclusion
of many additional functions, including e-governance and finance features, means it acts
more like Facebook, Snapchat, a bank, and a national identification system, all rolled into one.

WeChat's group chat rooms, meanwhile, which can have up to  users, are utilized heavily by
communities of makers, who create locally situated spaces for making by sharing code, designs
and events. One maker I spoke to showed me how she had created two separate WeChat user
accounts for herself once she hit the maximum groups per user, so that she could remain active
in the , maker, craft and business groups she was a part of. Another maker explained
that for him, 'WeChat is not just chatting software, it is community [...] I cannot live without it'.

It is no secret in China that the platforms that have not already been banned by its Great
Firewall are typically those which have been sanctioned by the Party. WeChat in particular is
known for its strict regulatory environment, which continues to foster suspicions that its con-
tent may be monitored. According to Citizen Lab reports in  and , over  phrases
(such as the keywords for 'student democracy movement') trigger immediate censorship, with
more added dynamically from emerging news. In addition, the reports demonstrate that
visual algorithms are now being used to filter certain images.

Revelations about WeChat's surveillance tactics, however, have not yet dampened the playful
acts of digital making which have produced the platform's most chaotic, strange, and wonder-
ful aesthetic outputs: Biaoqing, or stickers. These are customized GIFs and images that have
been digitally created, remixed and then exchanged by more than % of WeChat users in
order to disseminate memes, jokes and personal statements amongst their networks. Many
of these stickers are spread virally, appearing as crude illustrations and hastily Photoshopped
images and ranging from 'Kim Kardashian getting thrown into a toilet' to 'testicle man', also
known as 'Eunuch playing eggs'.




  reaction sticker on WeChat commonly referred to as 'mushroomboy head'. Statements include
'I surrender; your posing is too impressive', to 'poverty limits my imagination', 'let's go, mantis
 shrimp!', and 'stop typing, use more images', screenshot, .

As Zeng Yuli has shown, the power to create and distribute stickers lies in the hands of WeChat
users themselves. Because of this, they have come to represent qualities of decentralization,
individuality and irreverence – especially amongst young people. By providing a new generation
with opportunities to express themselves as digital makers for the first time through the production
of these small media artifacts, a unique aesthetic is being fostered, one which ever so slightly
challenges centralized ideologies through the irreverent discourse of 'icons thick with meaning'.

 Shùjùxiàn: Drinking from the data line

To examine the possibilities for subversion embedded in the process of creating WeChat
stickers, Shùjùxiàn aimed to explore whether the power-geometries or differentiations of
agency, access and mobility that defined the 'particular envelopes of space-time' experi-
enced by Chinese makers could start to be rearticulated, or at least challenged, through the




tactical practices of placeless making. While our interactions would, by necessity, be stratified
according to our locations, I wanted to see whether there was a way to harness the possibilities
of Blas' informatic opacity to enable a critical making discourse that did not violate the rules
of WeChat censorship algorithms.

After testing out various creative anti-tracking tactics with the help of makers based in the
U.K, the decision was made to create a set of six collaborative artworks. Each artwork would
how difficult it would be to enable a sense of playfully muddled placelessness by manipulating
the spaces of WeChat without using advanced tools. Our Chinese collaborators discussed how
most young people had long suspected their chats were individually monitored, and therefore
already self-censored their digital interactions. 'I know it sounds funny', they added, 'to say this,
because we do not even know what they can and cannot hear. What if they do not hear at all?'

The project proceeded to engage in a series of lively and seemingly innocuous sticker exchanges
on WeChat with eight makers. These makers, who usually worked on physical fabrication or craft
projects at makerspaces across China, donated stickers that had been created by themselves and
others WeChat users. Each sticker conveyed – albeit in a non-explicit way – their thoughts on the
confusing nature of what digital surveillance could mean. The stickers were then converted into
MP video screen-grabs, and glitched using a variety of methods. From the screen-recording app
CamStudio to the hidden GIF-layering qualities of Instagram, these glitch processes produced
deliberately grainy – and some might argue, especially bad-quality – outputs. In doing so, the
aim was to make their contributor chains especially difficult to trace.




exchanges of Shùjùxiàn are remixed using glitching apps, screenshot, .



Conclusion: The Small Triumphs of Placeless Making

The result of the Shùjùxiàn process was six digital artifacts, produced collaboratively with eight
anonymous makers. In one co-creation, a maker's rendition of their own face was remixed
into a series of animated GIFs, including one where they eat a watermelon and then cry, and
one where they offer a heart with a fake smile, and then withhold it at the last minute. These
GIFs expressed, without using text, the mixed feelings they felt about their continued depen-
dence on WeChat. In another, a maker uses GIFs from children's films related to watching,
listening and hunting to exemplify the many forms that digital surveillance might take. These
largely wordless contributions remain uncensored in the sticker exchanges that continue
to proliferate across WeChat's interfaces, artifacts of a lively flow of information which the
artworks of Shùjùxiàn are now proudly a part of.

 As a modest effort in experimenting with the tactical and playful practices of placeless mak-
 ing, Shùjùxiàn allowed my collaborators and I to reimagine ourselves – even if only briefly
– as members of a temporary autonomous space where transnational co-creation could
 persist on even the most tightly controlled digital platforms. While we were able to contest
 the power-geometries of stratification that regulated the spatial freedoms of those involved
 by confusing a few of its minor stewards – in this case, the algorithms that log and censor
 user interactions on WeChat – I cannot claim that our creations amounted to anything more
 transformative than that.

However, when the six digital artworks of Shùjùxiàn were featured at the Mozilla Festival in the
autumn of  in London as part of its annual 'Artists Open Web' exhibit, eight unnamed
makers across China were silently incorporated into exactly the kind of decentralized commu-
nity of co-creators that had been envisioned by the DIWO movement in . In their quiet
evasion of visibility, they too joined the ranks of many others who have creatively engaged in
carnivalesque pursuits of opacity – and will continue to do so – enabling new kinds of spatial
configurations and transgressions in their wake.

Acknowledgements

The author would like to express their gratitude to the young makers in the U.K. and in China
whom they spoke to, gained guidance from and co-created with throughout the Shùjùxiàn
process, including (but not limited to) the official WeChat bot of the First Emperor of Qin.

Chan, Anita Say. Networking Peripheries: Technological Futures and the Myth of Digital Universalism,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, .
'Chinese Netizen Expression Report', Tencent, , https://data.qq.com//article?id=.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan. New York:
Pantheon, .
Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. Philip
Howard. New York: Vintage Books, .
Fuller, Matthew and Andrew Goffey. Evil Media, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, .
Furtherfield. 'DIWO – Do It With Others', , http://archive.furtherfield.org/projects/diwo-do-it-
others-resource.
Graham, Mark, and Matthew Zook. 'Augmented Realities and Uneven Geographies: Exploring the
Geolinguistic Contours of the Web', Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space , no.  (
Hertz, Garnet. Critical Making, Hollywood: Telharmonium Press, , http://www.conceptlab.
com/criticalmaking/.
Knockel, Jeremy, Lotus Ruan, Mashashi Crete-Nishihata, and Rob Diebert. '(Can't) Picture This: An
Analysis of Image Filtering on WeChat Moments', Citizen Lab,  August , https://citizenlab.
ca///cant-picture-this-an-analysis-of-image-filtering-on-wechat-moments/.
Kumanyika, Chenjerai. 'Livestreaming in the Black Lives Matter Network', in Amber Day (ed.) DIY
Utopia: Cultural Imagination and the Remaking of the Possible, Minneapolis: Lexington Books,
Massey, Doreen. For Space, Thousand Oaks: Sage Publishing, .
Massey, Doreen. 'Power-Geometry and a Progressive Sense of Place', in John Bird, Barry Curtis,
Tim Putnam and Lisa Tickner (eds) Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change, London:
Massey, Doreen. Space, Place, and Gender, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, .
Ratto, Matt. 'Critical Making: Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life', The
Murray, Padmini Ray and Chris Hand. 'Making Culture: Locating the Digital Humanities in India', Visi-
ble Language Journal, no.  (). http://visiblelanguagejournal.com/issue//article/.
WeChat Uses One Censorship Policy in China and Another Internationally', Citizen Lab,  December
, https://citizenlab.ca///wechat-china-censorship-one-app-two-systems/.

Shaw, Adrienne. 'Encoding and Decoding Affordances: Stuart Hall and Interactive Media
org/./.
Xu, Christina. 'A Field Guide to China's Most Indispensible Meme', Motherboard,  August ,
https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/bmvd/china-meme-face-a-biaoqing-field-guide.
Yuli, Zeng. 'Why Young Chinese Are so Crazy about Online Sticker Sets', Sixth Tone,  September ,
https://www.sixthtone.com/news//why-young-chinese-are-so-crazy-about-online-sticker-sets.
  MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES   




 Fabbing the
Chinese Maker
  Identity
Xin Gu  Pip Shea

              FABBING THE CHINESE MAKER IDENTITY
                                       XIN GU AND PIP SHEA

On a Thursday afternoon in June , David Li, the poster boy of maker culture in
China, showed us around the Shenzhen Open Innovation Lab (SZOIL). SZOIL is in
Futian, an area of Shenzhen that offers tax breaks for the Creative Industries. SZOIL is
located in a creative cluster known as the Sino High Tech Industry Park. Surrounded
by a multitude of high-rises, it was still under construction and had a limited sense of
a 'lived' community. In one area of SZOIL, a group of American students were involved
in a workshop surrounded by D printers, scanners, laser cutters and other hand tools.
An agreement from MIT CBA hangs on the wall confirming SZOIL as an official Fab Lab.
The absence of local makers came as a surprise to us but is not unusual for Chinese
makerspaces. According to David:

      SZOIL, like many makerspaces in the city, plays more of a role of an intermediary
      between foreign makers looking for a soft landing in Shenzhen and local manufactur-
      ing supply chains. These makerspaces offer a one stop shop to makers who want to
      make, prototype, manufacture, market, and distribute their goods via makerspaces.

The Chinese maker identity has many influences. However, images of university gradu-
ates turned creative entrepreneurs and peasant workers using sophisticated technolo-
gies make up the dominant 'maker culture' narrative. Similar to constructions of maker
identity in the West, these stories represent technology as an enabler, a method of
empowering the disempowered. In contrast, our study of China's makerspaces supports
Anita Chan's position – 'counter-movement' activities designed to broaden participation
from developing regions has instead resulted in the normalization of Anglo-Saxon rule
and neoliberal market mechanisms. This, in turn, benefits the parts of the digital knowl-
edge economy capable of operating in transnational markets. Despite attempts by the
Chinese State to socially engineer maker culture, identities are also influenced by global
makers, maker spaces, foreign states, and corporations. This universalist knowledge
development demonstrates the power of the developed West in the global knowledge
economy. Consequently, this reveals the difficulties in creating alternative modes of
knowledge production, even for an economic powerhouse like China.




      offer a Fab Lab certification if makerspaces subscribe to its charter http://www.fabfoundation.org/index.
      php/what-qualifies-as-a-fab-lab/index.html.
                      MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                         




Shanzhai

Current manifestations of Chinese maker identities cannot be decoupled from Shan-
zhai, the term commonly used to describe the production of imitation goods. Shanzhai
emerged out of China’s declining manufacturing industry and its less-developed creative
production culture. Contemporary maker culture has even been referred to as ‘the new
Shanzhai’. However, with its lack of adherence to IP laws set by international agencies
such as the WTO, the innovation system underpinning Shanzhai is deemed incompatible
with the global digital economy. For this reason, makerspaces in China are deployed as
social mediators to reframe traditional manufacturing industries as a new form of digital
creative economy.

 Social shifts have seen China’s manufacturing workforce accept new terms of work
 required by the new knowledge economy. This position is likely to be supported by
‘borrowed’ maker culture than by the local Shanzhai culture. The latter is about ‘copy-
 ing’ – mastering techniques of production at scale – and is thus concerned more with
 sustaining manufacturing than replacing it. The politics of maker culture, on the other
 hand – open, democratic and flexible specialization carried out by new kinds of ‘maker
 agents’ (risk taking, free spirited and locally embedded) – entails values commonly shared
 by the global knowledge economy as well as the state trying to catch up with the West.






    China, Russia, and Ukraine, London: Routledge, .

The State

Chinese maker culture is shaped by Creative Industries policies. This makes it difficult to
see emergent maker identities as separate from a program of state-led social engineer-
ing. In contrast to the West, where maker identities are often underscored by a desire to
subvert the dominant paradigm, the Chinese maker identity is being developed from the
top down. Furthermore, the makerspace model is used by 'creative clusters' as market-
ing tools to conceal the new wave of urban gentrification in many post-industrial cities.

In previous work, we have argued that institutionalized makerspaces (such as those
in China and Northern Ireland) cannot be divorced from top down processes of nation
building, as a range of strategic public policy agencies are involved, despite low public
participation rates. For example, the state-influenced corporation Foxconn, a global
leader in mobile phone manufacturing, has invested heavily in maker industries as a way
of leveraging the less structured organizational logic of makerspaces. The development
of maker industries as a new inner-city economy – one adopted by post-industrial cities
to replace traditional manufacturing – offers a counter to more techno-utopian views of
maker culture in China.

Chinese makers now play an important intermediary role in between foreign makers, inves-
tors, and local manufacturing supply chains. This provides evidence that Chinese maker
culture has a genuine interest in disrupting global hierarchies in the digital knowledge
economy. Mass manufacturing industries are being rapidly forced out of Chinese cities.
Debates around a shift towards a new economy based on 'post-Fordist' forms of produc-
tion, information and communication networks, and a revised correlation between 'culture'
and 'economy' are making headway in Chinese policy circles. Makers and makerspaces
play a key role in this revision, as 'social mediators' of the transition towards a knowledge
economy situated between manufacturing industries and global technology markets.

The West

Many Chinese makerspaces champion activities that have emerged from a very Western
version of do-it-yourself (DIY) methods. Similar to Western makerspaces, their participants
are predominantly well-educated, middle class, and urban university graduates. Chinese
makerspaces also represent a work context outside the confines of the bureaucratically
controlled workplace, one that is perceived as more rewarding, meaningful, exciting, and
glamorous. And they are also underpinned by the same misleading premise: that anyone


                        MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                           




can make anything. However, Chinese makerspaces are very aligned with established
manufacturing industries. For example, Seeed Studio is a key player in Chinese maker
culture. The company manufactures hardware that leverages foreign ideas sourced from
the crowd funding website Kickstarter. Seeed Studio supports a local makerspace called
Chaihuo that develops technology solutions through grassroots social justice initiatives.
Although Chaihuo displays traits in line with Western constructions of maker culture,
its relationship with Seeed Studio sees it more closely aligned with traditional Chinese
manufacturing.

In the West, self-directed acts of citizenship, or 'DIY citizenship' have also been associ-
ated with maker culture. It is important to note that these self-directed practices derive
from people who have the capacity and agency to perform in non-normative ways. It is
important to highlight this in the Chinese context as it creates new conditions of exclu-
sivity. Dunbar-Hester's work sheds historical light on this trait, revealing that 'DIY itself
has traditionally not been for just "anyone"' because the original DIY movement of the s
and s also championed a version of self-directed home improvement codified with white
maleness. Furthermore, maker culture privileges the historically masculinized practices
of engineering, computer programming, and amateur electronics. Those who inject
this 'universalist' view into the propagation of technology may reproduce the very same
conditions where exclusion and hierarchies are present. If Chinese maker culture is to
create an alternative space for technological and political participation, it has to address
structural societal exclusion, whilst critically reflecting on local contexts.

Critical Making – a Fallacy?

Scholarly Critical Making describes a method of making that emphasizes critical reflection
of the materials being worked with. As a practice, it aims to challenge existing systems
of authority by rallying against incumbent industrial paradigms. The challenge inherent
in situating Chinese makers as 'critical makers' therefore lies in its close alignment with
existing manufacturing infrastructures and assemblages. More precisely, the Chinese
maker context is pushing for the disruption of Western-centric digital knowledge econo-


my hierarchies, rather than their own industrial processes. Attempts to further situate Chinese
makers as 'critical makers' must also seek to understand the arrangements of power affecting
acts of making.

Shanzhai is interesting in the Critical Making context because it is concerned with the growing
consumer demand for cheap, personalized mobile phones with a short shelf-life. It addresses
some of the barriers to innovation related to the rising cost of RD in traditional manufacturing
industries, and recognizes the sociocultural context that small and micro businesses can innovate
within. A key claim of Shanzhai is to replace the technical division of labour in traditional factories
with a multi-skilled workforce empowered to make complex decisions in product innovation.

In contrast, the Western maker culture narrative emphasizes disrupting the social order through
the demystification of technology – or alternatively, the nurturing of maker agency through critical
making practices. This belief conforms to western DIY citizenship in that those with limited tech-
nical skills may identify strongly with politics of making. But this belief falls short of comprehend-
ing the social reality in China. Participation in the maker movement requires not only technical
skills but resources such as time, capital, and creative thinking that are accessible only to the
privileged few. Social inequality within China remains widespread, and current manifestations
of maker culture – as the exclusive domain of the knowledgeable, the entrepreneurial, and the
creative – could exacerbate the already severe socioeconomic divide in the country. On top of
this, the privileging of foreign makers as creative agents capable of political participation versus
local (less creative) ones re-creates inequalities that maker culture was meant to disrupt.

Makerspaces have attempted to address this issue by engaging makers from novice groups,
including peasant workers and retirees. However, most of these participants had engineering or
design backgrounds, and almost all had university degrees. This attempt to promote a universalist
politics of maker agency represented the structural difficulties in promoting technology-induced
empowerment. This difficulty is largely due to Chinese maker culture being less concerned with
challenging the power differentiation associated with production and consumption, and more
focused on collectively dealing with societal changes shaped by the technologies of globalization.

In China's maker culture, there are different attitudes towards 'making it'. Discourse within mak-
erspaces tend to 'encourage all members to make' while asserting that 'not everyone can make
it'. Certain individual makers 'just want to have fun', 'make friends outside work' and 'practice
English'. Ultimately though, participants are there to utilize existing manufacturing infrastructure
rather than develop emancipatory practices.

Challenges in the Development of Chinese Maker Agency

Based on our observations of Shenzhen's maker spaces since , it is clear that partici-
pation in makerspaces resembles characteristics of precarious work in the broader Creative
Industries. In addition, this precariat was engineered by an intention of a middle class aiming
at scoring political points. Shenzhen's maker culture provides evidence that participation in





non-proprietary technology 'gift economies' does not deliver individual emancipation. They
reiterate that the Western vision of open, participatory innovation masks the corporate capital-
ization of voluntary labour. This echoes Sharon Zukin's critique of the somewhat related practice
of hackathons. Such 'ritual(s) of ecstatic labor' functioned as a way to 'manufacture consent'
towards precarious work in the new creative industries. As access to digital making technologies
increases in China, the social momentum of differentiation has the potential to create new kinds of
inequality. Issues pertaining to digital literacies are a product of class caused by the construction
of new systems of inclusion and exclusion.

The pursuit of the 'the shock of the new' associated with DIY making can be repositioned as a key
value for class stratification. These versions of free, individualized, artisanal innovation emerging
from the wreckage of mass manufacture are unlikely to create the participatory environment for
those disenfranchised in society. The gap between working-class culture represented by Shanzhai
and middle-class culture grounded in makerspaces, corporations, and the state cannot easily be
bridged by Western universalistic rhetoric. Makers and makerspaces increasingly look towards
Shanzhai for inspiration, promoting it as the origin of Chinese technical culture. Aligning maker
culture with Shanzhai offers an important local context, but doesn't negate that building structures
of participation (like makerspaces) can be difficult to implement in China.

Our study noted an emergent resistance from local communities who questioned the legitimacy
of a universal maker culture. They see the new concept of Shanzhai . as more appropriate in
addressing local problems such as automation and gentrification. Shanzhai . elevates prac-
tices that are descendants of the old industries. They also acknowledge that the development
of maker agency in the Chinese context has to address historically limiting factors to technical
participation – issues such as limited access to technology, limited creative agency, and labour
exploitation. How cultural democracy is maintained or suppressed as part of the infrastructures
of making also warrants a more focused research agenda. A  study of internet censorship
in China provides sight lines for the limits of the maker movement in China. The very notion of a
DIY citizenship linked to sociopolitical change runs into conflict with China's internet censorship, a
regime that routinely removes content deemed to promote collective action. This indicates that the
universalist logic of maker culture might be beyond the frame of the Chinese sociopolitical system.

An Alternative Politics of Making?

The accommodation of individual creativity within Chinese maker culture is emerging through a
nationalized creative economy paradigm focusing on cultural consumption and individualism. Far
from enabling widespread participatory culture-making, Chinese maker culture is a source of
aspirational stories of personal ping pong training machines and nuclear decommissioning



robots. Such examples rise to the surface as they represent 'playfulness', 'openness', 'passion',
and 'sociality' – terms that privilege Western maker culture ideologies over a local emphasis
on structural efficiency. Furthermore, the involvement of corporations and the state in shaping
Chinese maker culture hints at an ongoing top-down organizational paradigm.

If the socially democratic ideals of digital universalism are to infiltrate China on a meaningful
level, then attention must be focused on its broader cultural and social structures. The debate
has to move beyond the politics of 'resource ownership and user agency', instead focusing
on the correlation between socioeconomic shifts within publics and traditional structures
which create problems for participation. We must also be mindful of the effects of techno-
logical automation – a celebrated aspect of maker culture – on employment. Workers from
traditional manufacturing may resist maker culture as it represents a threat to their existing
labour arrangements.

This is not the first time that China has embraced a Western model of development. More often
than not, Chinese 'modernization' has meant learning not just technical and administrative
solutions but Western cultural forms and values. This tendency once again raises persistent
questions: What can be mobilized from one's own tradition? What and how much to borrow?
And what social, cultural and political changes might follow in their wake? These questions
are yet to find their answers in Chinese maker culture. Responding to these challenges will be
key for creating an alternative space that is not confined to the logics of digital universalism.

MIT Press, .
Ratto, Matt. 'Critical Making: Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life', The
                      MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                        


O'Connor, Justin and Xin Gu. 'A New Modernity? The Arrival of "Creative Industries" in China',
Shea, Pip. 'Civic Practices, Design, and Makerspaces', in Anthony McCosker, Sonja Vivienne and
Amelia Johns (eds) Negotiating Digital Citizenship: Control, Contest, and Culture, London: Rowman
Shea, Pip. 'Hacker Agency and the Raspberry Pi: Informal Education and Social Innovation in a Bel-
fast Makerspace', in Jeremy Hunsinger and Andrew Schrock (eds) Making Our World: The Hacker
Shea, Pip and Xin Gu. 'Makerspaces and Urban Ideology: the Institutional Shaping of Fab Labs in
Terranova, Tiziana. 'Free labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy', Social Text . ():
Zukin, Sharon and Max Papadantonakis. 'Hackathons as Co-Optation Ritual: Socializing Workers
and Institutionalizing Innovation in the "New" Economy', in Arne Kalleberg and Steven Vallas (eds)

  Maker-Activists
      in the
 Post-Growth City

      Cindy Kohtala
       Sharon Ede
                        MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                          




       MAKER-ACTIVISTS IN THE POST-GROWTH CITY
                              CINDY KOHTALA  SHARON EDE

Materialist grassroots groups (DIY maker-activists) not only create their own local products
and technologies, but also spaces, communities, practices, narratives and economic models.
They do so in participatory ways – deliberately pushing against consumerism, the anonymity
of mass production, and the neoliberal policies of the cities they are within, where the goal
of innovation is economic growth from which only few benefit. Whether they explicitly label
their activities as 'post-growth' or rather implicitly experiment with post-growth, anti-capital-
ist, environmentally-oriented practices, these groups are both shaping and being shaped by
techno-utopian urban narratives.

We've met and worked with DIY maker-activists, mainly in wealthy European and Austra-
lian cities. Situated in makerspaces, these individuals and groups make things using digital
fabrication equipment and computer-controlled tools like milling machines and laser cutters.
Importantly, many groups we observe also involve themselves in urban activist initiatives such
as gardening and agriculture, Right To The City actions, and repair, reuse, and recycling
events. They offer compelling ways for other non- or semi-activist citizens to influence their
own neighborhoods and cities. Their workshops (FabLabs, makerspaces, hacklabs, etc.) are
often represented in urban imaginaries that depict smart, empowered citizens innovating, eco-
systems of entrepreneurs circulating materials, and multi-generational and socioeconomically
diverse social groups learning new skills together. Yet we see relatively little actual investment
from public stakeholders into community workshops. What, then, does it take for a community
technology workshop to setup, survive, and thrive in an urban area?

Some groups align with established institutions in order to gain wider audiences and build legit-
imacy. Others resist commodification, defending community values and retaining an alternative,
countercultural identity. Their decisions embed tensions and trade-offs, and it is as unhelpful
to dismiss 'mainstreaming' as mere selling out or cooption as it to overlook maker experiments
in post-capitalist organizing as too marginal to have any impact. In practice, activists are highly
precarious. Despite the best intentions, workshops easily become new privatized spaces for
elite consumption and may even foster negative consequences such as gentrification. These


     Environmental Sustainability', Science  Technology Studies (, ahead of print).
trends suggest that the support of activist spaces requires more consideration in a post-growth
city. Critical reflection would mean examining the ways these groups actually use these spaces
to explore alternative economic models, localize aspects of production, and create value. It
would also mean probing what roles municipal authorities and other stakeholders have in
supporting these grassroots community spaces, along with their motivations for doing so. We
consider the twin perspectives of both activists and city authorities because we too operate in
these communities alternatively as researchers, observers, and organizers, but also as analysts,
advocates, and activists.

Currently DIY digital-making is espoused as disruptive, even as a pathway to a sustainable
industrial revolution, but precisely how that revolution will unfold depends on how groups
organize, with whom they align, and what commons they identify as worth protecting. Some
of the seemingly ephemeral choices being made today will be institutionalized, solidifying into
tomorrow's post-industrial urban production infrastructure.

Paying the Rent, Planting Seeds

From the maker-activist's point of view, tensions arise due to their uneasy relationship with the
institutions and infrastructures of the unsustainable present. Activists live precariously but may
do so deliberately, preferring to live in drafty former factories and procure food by dumpster
diving than earning a conventional salary. Being able to pay rent for space often depends on
expanding a social networks of artists, designers, and other users who want access to shared
workshop facilities, storage, and/or learning opportunities. They debate internally if activities
to secure revenue for rent or individual income accord with capitalist logics. Such spaces
and their communities thus comprise a bricolage of the commercial and commodified, the
unbranded, the experimental, and the hacked. These spaces signal opportunities for post-
growth transformations. Yet activists often eschew the conventional middle-class lifestyle to
such an extent that it is difficult to determine what lessons can be learned for wider society.

In one particular case we know of, an artists collective procured the rent for a self-organized,
open access, free culture space from a charitable foundation for the first year and from
crowdfunding the second year, but has recently had to close its doors. Similarly, in our own
experience, the city was tolerant of our free culture urban greenhouse in Helsinki city center,
which ran for seven years due to much volunteer effort and grants from cultural foundations.
But the space's role in fostering an environmentally oriented, participatory cultural milieu in
the city was not recognized until a year after the greenhouse was dismantled. Elsewhere we


      activism and expertise in fostering sustainable, post-growth urban development.
                       MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                    




have argued that the greenhouse planted seeds for another urban greenhouse to emerge
five years later. Here, activists learn through hands-on practice about renewable energy,
gardening and food self-sufficiency, and making everyday items from discarded materials (e.g.
soap from cooking oil, power banks from scrapped laptop batteries), inviting other citizens to
these open workshops.

Obviously these examples are not new. Artist and community technology collectives have long
gathered in the wastelands and derelict areas of transforming post-industrial cities. Nor are
cities compelled to support them. But we argue that the lack of acknowledgement (whether
financial support or other recognition) erodes the potential of community workshops. These
workshops provide relatively low-cost, low-risk opportunities for citizens to experiment with
circularity and novel, low carbon, locally embedded, post-capitalist practices that depart from
conventional profit-seeking. Activists have often laid the groundwork for activities that others
later profit from. Experimental prototypes are copied and commodified, becoming products
and services. For maker-activists, contributions do not always need to be rewarded with money,
especially as government funding is subject to the vagaries of political changes and shifting
priorities. Acknowledgement of time, expertise, and labor is desired – but here activists are
usually disappointed.

For advocates of open access, community-based workshops, investing in community develop-
ment nourishes the seedlings of alternative, local economies. Given the conditions of enforced
precarity that many face, these communities foster st century enterprise, where people
are more empowered to MYOJ ('Make Your Own Job'). This is critical in a transitioning world
where more traditional forms of employment are disappearing and more people are seeking
to build a livelihood around their passions and skills. Indeed, some cities and organizations
regard shared workshops as a 'common asset', much like a library, that offers services to the
community. Others see them as incubators, where people with expertise provide training,
mentorship, and space for others to build enterprises such as cooperatives. Other options for
funding makerspaces as civic infrastructure include Community Land Trusts, where community
assets are held in a trust and stewarded by a nonprofit entity on behalf of a community. All
these examples show that activist-authority relationships need not be reduced to mere financial
transactions. For communities, there is a middle ground between government dependence and
full autonomy that is being increasingly and creatively explored. Various operating models can
be piloted, and diverse forms of partnership between activists, cities, and other stakeholders
can be prototyped, planting seeds for future configurations.


Enabling Creative Citizens

The dilemmas activists face regarding money and income are common ones. They reveal the
 inherent contradictions in what cities think such shared community spaces are for – and
 what the city itself is for. Current definitions of success and innovation in wealthy post-in-
 dustrial cities, even when not oriented to consumer capitalism, still tend to emphasize
 the individual rather than the communal. This partially explains the ubiquitous tendency
 to reduce DIY maker culture to romanticized (Western) notions of material engagement,
 resulting in a superficial catalogue of the most photogenic projects and the slickest
 workshop spaces. Some cities with active maker communities have attempted to exploit
'creativity' as a branding opportunity, especially when vying for European and regional
 funding. Drawing on the 'creative class' coined by urban planning scholar Richard Flor-
 ida, their goal is to promote their identity as a 'creative city'. But according to activists,
 authorities often end up supporting business-as-usual: incumbent enterprises that make
 no clear contribution to collective creativity, true innovation, or regional well-being.

However, there are examples that defy these disappointing outcomes. We visited one
Nordic artist-designer collective where the city had provided grants not only to purchase
a former factory, but also to renovate it (as a valued piece of urban industrial heritage).
Moreover, the activists have been allocated grants to equip the building as a fully func-
tioning community workshop for citizens. The large workshop and co-working spaces will
serve local small business owners and freelance creatives in particular, but in essence
they are facilities for everyone. The collective can then farm out design work to their
freelancer network, offer facilities for the unemployed and underemployed to re-skill
and improve their quality of life, and spend free experimental time on prototyping novel
materials based on local waste streams.

The desire to support local creative communities, whether they be professionals or
hobbyists, often takes the form of establishing a makerspace in a community center or
municipal library. Other stakeholders – charitable foundations, cultural nonprofits, and
industry associations – have also established open access workshops to these ends, and
their stories are worth examining further. Several factors have contributed to the longevity
of these workshops. In one case, there is a long-established history of community craft
workshops in the region, making them familiar to local residents. Several spaces adopt
long-term engagement strategies that integrate local residents into the makerspace,
step by step, as responsible co-owners. These efforts entail impact assessments and
indicators that depart – often radically – from the capitalist growth paradigm.

However, in general, the diversity of grassroots activist spaces has been challenging for
outsiders to fathom. Authorities often struggle to grasp the difference between commu-
nity-based, open access workshops and other facilities that offer commercial D-printing
services, or are only open to employees of a company or to staff and students of an






educational institution. Moreover, there is little recognition that urban areas have room
for several types of activist spaces. Whether situated in libraries, staged as self-con-
tained community workshops, or erected as more specialized open-access workshops,
this diverse array of spaces could cater to a diverse array of people, from the professional
to the hobbyist, from the inventor to the creative citizen.

Hacking Consumption Culture

Along with fostering employability, creativity, and a generally experimental milieu, there
is potential for DIY maker-activism to encourage efforts towards urban environmental
sustainability. DIY makers, like environmentalist activists before them, often focus on
challenges that institutional actors have failed to adequately address or sometimes even
identify, whether it is our accumulating piles of single-use plastic packaging or phos-
phorus cycles in our environment. From manipulating plastics into useful new materials
in public workshops to experimenting with 'pee-ponics' systems in urban gardening,
activists make these issues visible (uncomfortably at times) and directly confront them.

In one case we know, the municipality has given an entire industrial building in the city
center to a design collective for free, for an entire year. This resource will allow them to
experiment with plastic recycling, developing new materials and reusing existing ones. In
contrast, in another city just two hours away by train, urban planners are attempting to
sell an activist collective's living-and-working premises out from under them, despite the
collective having secured enough funding to buy the building (including a FabLab) via
crowdfunding. If they lose their premises, activists fear their neighborhood will become
gentrified by developers converting industrial buildings into high-income housing. At
the same time, this collective has a champion in a different municipal department who
has invited the activists to lead local 'citizen science' educational projects, which has
financially sustained them for several years and has provided the region with valuable
citizen-gathered data on waterways.

In our observations, activist-makers reject the eco-modernist techno-fixes that charac-
terize so much of the current green economy discourse, especially in cities. Makers may
embrace sensors and mass-produced circuit boards, for instance, but these are inte-
grated into 'appropriate', localized, customized assemblages of their own making, which
resist commodification. Many are interested above all in process – in getting together to
problematize and ask better questions, rather than to 'solve problems'. These projects,
from beehives to vermicomposting boxes and permaculture initiatives, indicate a com-
mitted examination of what urban environmental sustainability could mean. Through
constantly probing and prototyping alongside each other, activists encourage collective
action in dedicated spaces and places.


From the perspective of advocates, the concept of community workshop can be framed as
a type of 'enabling infrastructure', as municipal budgets for infrastructure are often much
bigger. If infrastructure enables an activity to occur, then space and the rent required to
access space is infrastructure. If a municipality or regional authority has budget for waste and
recycling infrastructure, an argument can be made for 'transplanting' some of that funding
to the upper part of the materials hierarchy.

Conclusions: Prototyping Possibilities

The examples we have given illustrate the tensions in making attractive and liveable cities in a
post-growth era marked by significant economic uncertainty and environmental crisis, and the
role of makers' community workshops within them. It is too easy to romanticize makerspaces
and empowerment-wash them as beneficial. While there are many claims regarding how
makers are making production more local and more sustainable, there is little actual evidence.
At the same time, urban innovation and enterprise need not be measured only in neoliberal
terms – as commercialized packages, conventional services, and proprietary products – but
instead might be understood as the ongoing life-forces of local residents doing things together.
Certainly this 'free and open source' model is not business-as-usual and must be learned.
However, a counter-culture community workshop can be 'domesticated' into a sustainable
city in various ways, fulfilling the requirements of municipal spending and the challenges of
decision-making without compromising the community's ideals.

Our own experiences and observations indicate some of the ways shared workshops can
remain sustainable: with targeted support that does not constrain the needs of activists for
openness and pursuing idealistic projects; with strategies that draw stakeholders and activists
into co-ownership; by supplementing the most experimental spaces for specialized makers
with familiar community assets that are more broadly inclusive, accessible, and educative,
such as library makerspaces; and by collectively redefining what makes a successful city. By
asking activists what commons they are protecting, and by asking cities and stakeholders
to define post-growth indicators, the implications of a community workshop might be better
articulated. These questions would help both actors find common ground and shape their
dialogue on future pathways.

Kohtala, Cindy. 'The Sociomateriality of FabLabs: Configurations of a Printing Service or Counter-Con-
text?', Journal of Peer Production  (), http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue--makerspac-
es-and-institutions/peer-reviewed-papers/the-sociomateriality-of-fablabs/.
Kohtala, Cindy and Andrew Paterson. 'Oxygen for Töölönlahti', in Eeva Berglund and Cindy Kohtala
Lange, Bastian and Hans-Joachim Bürkner. 'Open Workshops as Sites of Innovative Socio-Eco-
nomic Practices: Approaching Urban Post-Growth by Assemblage Theory', Local Environment
Lloveras, Javier, Cathy Parker, Lee Quinn. 'Reclaiming Sustainable Space: A Study of Degrowth Activ-
Marin, Fernanda. 'Cosmo-Localization: Can Thinking Globally and Producing Locally Really Save our
Planet?', OuiShare Magazine blog,  November , https://www.ouishare.net/article/cosmo-local-
ization-can-thinking-globally-and-producing-locally-really-save-our-planet.
Schlosberg, David and Romand Coles. 'The New Environmentalism of Everyday Life: Sustainability,
Thompson, Matthew. 'Between Boundaries: From Commoning and Guerrilla Gardening to Community

 Towards Feminist
Labs: Provocations
  for Collective
 Knowledge-Making

        Maya Livio
       Lori Emerson
                       MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                        




     TOWARDS FEMINIST LABS: PROVOCATIONS FOR
          COLLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE-MAKING

                              MAYA LIVIO AND LORI EMERSON

In recent years, the lab as a site of knowledge production has increasingly become common-
place both within and outside of academic institutions, beyond the established lab-based dis-
ciplines of the fundamental and applied sciences. The increased prevalence of labs suggests
that scholars and practitioners are actively pursuing new models for knowledge production,
moving away from ideals of solitary work and towards collaborative, experimental, and interdis-
ciplinary research approaches. However, despite the apparent newness of labs, their dominant
lineage stems from a racist, sexist, and colonial past, bringing methods, infrastructures, and
underlying assumptions along with it. These handed-down affordances may inform the ways
in which lab work is structured, and in turn, shape the kinds of knowledge that labs produce.
In this paper, we argue that contemporary labs, as spaces of collective and interdisciplinary
thinking and doing, require their own consideration as sites for feminist methodology.

In order to examine lab practices, it is important to first examine their multiple origins. Early
proto-lab spaces included sites like monasteries, workshops, and kitchens – spaces which
were never called labs but had many of the elements associated with 'labness' such as a
source of heat, a central worktable, open and flexible work areas, a library, and a surround-
ing collection of tools and materials. The most commonly recognized provenance of labs is
found in the anatomical theaters and apothecaries of the th century, and this century is
generally considered the time at which entities properly called 'laboratories' emerged. How-
ever, if we include the many sites of experimental work that surfaced later on in the late th
century, examples of proto-labs should also include – as Steven Shapin points out – a motley
assortment of venues, including the private residences of 'gentlemen', 'sites where places of
scientific work were coextensive with places of residence'.

The fact that places of scientific experimentation migrated further into private homes for a
 time points again to the importance of kitchens as integral to the history of labs, and is of
 particular relevance to our essay. Women have, of course, long been relegated to the kitchen
 as the heart of the domestic sphere and, as Alix Cooper points out, in early modern times
'kitchens and basements or root cellars formed improvised laboratories for women to tinker
 with and write down medical recipes'. With the gradual appropriation of the kitchen as a
 place for 'gentlemanly' experimentation over the span of the th and early th centuries,
 women were essentially given the bizarre and contradictory message that they belong in a
 kitchen, that the kitchen might in fact be a lab, but that a lab is not for them.




     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, , p. .

 Not surprisingly then, the th century ushered in the all-male industrial research laboratory,
 largely pioneered by Thomas Edison at Menlo Park, New Jersey. A so-called 'invention factory'
 and the largest private lab in the U.S. in the s, Menlo Park simultaneously built on and
 departed from the long history of kitchens, apothecaries, theaters, and chemistry labs which
 we briefly summarize above. As Darren Wershler et al. point out in THE LAB BOOK, Edison's
 lab drew on the spatial, infrastructural, and administrative organization of labs and, with its
 frenzied embrace of entrepreneurialism and innovation, laid the groundwork for most of the
 major technology-based labs to come in the th century. A lab such as the MIT Media Lab,
 then, is founded upon these archaeological layers. The significance of this particular lineage
 of labs here is that contemporary interdisciplinary labs are inevitably built on some of these
 inherited value systems. The project of colonial science itself has deep ties to labs, as Kathryn
 Yusoff reminds us in A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None. Yusoff outlines how, beginning
 in the mid-s, an entire community of Marshallese residing in the Pacific islands were
 removed from their homeland so that it could be used for nuclear testing. Even though the
 Marshallese were placed in nearby islands, they were exposed to radioactive ash after the
 U.S. carried out its largest nuclear detonation, 'Castle Bravo', in .  Marshallese
 were 'treated as test subjects for the effects of radiation', which for Yusoff is comparable to
 Hortense J. Spillers's description of medical experimentation on sick Black Americans, in that
'the procedures adopted for the captive flesh demarcate a total objectification, as the entire
 captive community becomes a living laboratory'.

While labs bear with them the potential to set a particularly harmful praxis into motion, they
are malleable entities and contain potentialities for new world-making practices. Therefore,
inspired by boyd and Crawford's 'Six Provocations for Big Data', we offer here six provoca-
tions for feminist lab work – following hooks's call to bring feminist theory 'into the streets'
by bringing it 'into the suites' of lab-based knowledge production. Our provocations are
grounded in established feminist methodological concerns, which we have developed and
applied towards the collaborative knowledge-work of labs. They are far from comprehensive,
and while we do aim for the concrete, are not intended as step-by-step methods, but rather
as methodological probes that can be used in the development of site-specific lab protocols.
We believe that these protocols must always be situated and collectively established within
the community, time, and place in which they are mobilized.

Throughout, we insist on the importance of moving beyond issues of inclusion when making
labs more feminist. To be clear, it is urgent for marginalized and underrepresented peoples
to be included in lab leadership, membership, and communities. Conversations about how
to include these groups in labs and other knowledge-making spaces, commonly echoed in


      , p. . Emphasis our own.



movements such as 'women in tech' or 'women in STEM', are unfortunately still critically nec-
essary today. However, we point out that while critiques of 'add women and stir' approaches
have been leveraged for quite some time, they seem to continue to dominate popular discourse.
Beyond 'adding and stirring', it is necessary to restructure the way labs work, and to consider
and address pressing feminist concerns within them, such as those of access, epistemology,
care, hierarchy, labor, and the environment.

. Access is Complex.

Our first provocation deals with the core feminist concern of access, addressing questions such
as: Who has access to the financial and spatial/infrastructural resources needed to create a lab
in the first place? Who has access to an already-existing lab? Who may access a lab's resources?
Who has access to a lab's outputs?

 While it might be tempting to simply answer 'everyone should have access' to the above questions,
'everyone' too easily glosses over the realities of privilege, especially in higher education, which
 determine who can even contemplate the possibility of running a lab. It may be obvious, but
 also bears underscoring, that marginalized peoples must overcome countless hurdles before
 they can even find themselves employed by an institution of higher education. They must then
 position themselves to administrators and granting agencies as having the ability to successfully
 start a lab by doing work that is clearly legible to those in power, and is particularly legible in
 terms of requiring a significant investment of space, funding, and materials. Individuals must
 also demonstrate that they will produce outputs that are legible as 'scholarship' in their home
 discipline; thus, work that is, for example, collaborative, undertaken with a flat hierarchy, inter-
 disciplinary through and through, open-ended, processual, not easily amenable to peer review,
 or multimodal will likely not be legible those with the power to fund them, whereas work that is,
 for example, heavily data or technology-driven, undertaken with a clear hierarchy (such as a
 principal investigator moving down to numerous subordinate investigators), peer-reviewed, and
 publishable as a book or journal article almost certainly gives credibility.

In terms of who has access to an already-existing lab and its resources, again, it might be
tempting to answer 'everyone is welcome to use a lab'. However, 'everyone' can too easily appear
neutral, while the term is in fact still deeply embedded in ableist, gendered, colonial and racial
assumptions about who counts as a someone, especially a someone of value. We explore these
sorts of epistemic assumptions in our second provocation below, but for now we can assert
that, when it comes to answering the question of access to a lab, we believe in the productivity
of continually questioning, answering, and questioning again who gets to enter a lab, who gets
to use its materials, and who gets to produce work considered 'of value'. Such probes can be
broken down further into questions including, but not limited to: Is the entrance to the space, as
well as the interior, and signage accessible to people with disabilities? Are there clear instructions
about how to use the equipment, or are there unwritten/unspoken assumptions about expertise
that will determine who will or will not use it? What kinds of opportunities are there for people to
receive training on how to use the equipment? If all the equipment is not immediately available
in the lab, is there an up-to-date and easily discovered inventory?

Finally, with regards to who has access to a lab's outputs, once more we advocate for a
practice of continual questioning. Such questions include, but are not limited to: Is the
output produced in accordance with accessibility standards? Is it open-source (including
open-hardware, open-data, etc), and if not, why? Is the output written in clear and accessible
language, and/or supplemented with images, infographics, audio, video, or other materials
to accommodate multiple audiences and learning styles?

It should go without saying that while continually questioning, answering, and questioning
again who has access to a lab and its materials is necessary, the questions and answers
in and of themselves will not change the demographic of who is accessing the lab. Going
out into communities around the lab to find out who might have an interest in participating,
and what particular practices need to change to better welcome those potential partici-
pants, is also required. That is, lab members need to make sure that in thinking through
lab access they don't simply capitulate to an iterative process that only takes into account
who and what is already known.

. Epistemic Assumptions Run Deep.

Our second provocation deals with the epistemic underpinnings of labs. As we have already
indicated, the history of labs is inseparable from the history of science, with the anatomical
theatre, apothecary, and Edison's lab serving as a few early examples. We have also noted
that science is a project with colonial origins. As Tuhiwai Smith notes, scientific classification
systems were developed largely as mechanisms for organizing the knowledge generated by
(and appropriated from) expeditions to the 'new world': 'New colonies were the laboratories
of western science'. Making this history explicit is the first step to demonstrating how con-
temporary labs may, advertently or inadvertently, be bound to knowledge and value systems
adopted from empirical science. Writing alternative histories of labs back in, by documenting
the shift of kitchens between lab and not lab for instance, is also a valuable concurrent exer-
cise. Together, these kinds of correctives can help to illuminate how marginalized knowledges
have been excluded in the scientific codification of knowledge within labs, and more generally.

As Geri L. Dickson reminds us, 'scientific knowledge does not represent the totality of knowl-
edge', and historical approaches are incomplete if labs do not think through their inherited
assumptions and reorient themselves where necessary. The work again begins with the
inclusion of diverse persons and perspectives within lab leadership, membership, and the
communities the lab interfaces with. Lab communities include the local community in which
a lab is situated, the communities who will be impacted by a lab's work, and communities
that the lab researches, where applicable – all of which must be considered a vital part of
a lab's knowledge base. Reaching out to community representatives, building long-term


      Jaggar (ed.) Just Methods: An Interdisciplinary Feminist Reader, nd edition, Boulder: Paradigm
      Publishers, , p..
                       MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                        




relationships with them (as opposed to one-time 'outreach' events), sharing lab outputs with
them in an accessible fashion, and being open to their feedback (as a form of peer review)
are therefore significant strategies for feminist lab-making. Some methods for working with a
lab's communities can be adapted from Patricia Maguire's 'Feminist Participatory Research',
which, via Tandon, 'begins with the premise that knowledge has become the single most
important basis of power and control'. Maguire continues:

     Ordinary people are rarely considered knowledgeable, in the scientific sense, or
     capable of knowing their own reality. They are excluded from the increasingly more
     specialized research industry, barred by requirements of the 'scientific method', and
     by intimidating concepts and jargon, money, time, skills, and experience.

Maguire's list of how non-specialists are excluded from knowledge-making practices can be
reversed into a set of counter-methods for labs, again tying back to access – for example,
by making language, tools, and skills accessible for participation of community members
and other non-experts.

Other forms of knowledge production which are of particular importance in lab settings are
embodied knowledges and skills. Knowledges such as tool making and repair, craft, and other
bodily doings cut across a range of lab disciplines, from makerspaces to biolabs. How are
these knowledges included as part of the lab's knowledge base? How are they documented
and acknowledged? At the same time, technical skills are sometimes treated as more valuable,
particularly in technology-centered spaces. 'Soft skills' such as communication, organization,
management, writing, mediation, and knowledge-synthesis must also be taken into consid-
eration. How are these valued as part of the knowledge work of a lab?

Finally, situating a lab's research is critical for feminist work. This includes reflexivity about a
lab's position and perspectives, transparency about funding and research stakeholders, as
well as efforts to complicate notions of objectivity whenever possible. Feminist researchers
have repeatedly demonstrated the impossibility of a neutral 'view from nowhere', as even the
most mundane research activities are knotted in subjectivity. Feminist labs should therefore
work towards, as Haraway argues, 'partiality and not universality [as] the condition of being
heard to make rational knowledge claims'.

.
had been written about the museum. I, in turn, presented the haul of books I got at the museum
gift shop earlier. Amongst them was the book that vastly increased the mark of the Museum of
Jurassic Technology's on the map of American legendary places, Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonders
by Lawrence Weschler, a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction in . It only
took a few seconds to understand that the book wasn't exactly a source of pride at the museum.
The book, it seemed, had tried to disentangle threads that the museum had carefully woven
to enchant. Trained (and very successful) as a journalist, the author attempted to describe a
kind of truth behind the museum and its founder based on his research of facts and data, an
investigatory truth. This truth meticulously described a process of following clues in the museum
back to their origin, hoping to discover their 'true' nature. Yet what if this attempt was misplaced?
Why would it be? Perhaps the MJT does not attempt to preserve a particular kind of scientific
knowledge embodied in artifacts, but a different way of knowing in which constellations of objects
tell stories and create experiences of wonder. It is a different kind of epistemic machine in a way,
an intentional escape from a museum as collection of facts to a museum as constellations of
fabulations. In this space, truth goes beyond data, moving towards an experience of the relations
between. Therefore, no truth can be captured by accounting for each bit that configures the
museum, for dissecting each event that led its founder to create it.

I do not mention the Museum of Jurassic Technology because it bears the word 'technology'
in its title. It might as well be the 'Museum of Pleistocene Gastronomy'. The focus here is on
the building, making, and instituting of a place to which people come to work – and that work
being emancipatory when compared with conditions found elsewhere in the industry. It is a
space that critically prefigures practices that do not delineate and render community as a
tactical asset of technology. It is a space where emancipatory practice is encoded as desire
in Critical Making. In this poetic constellation of artifacts – but also in the industry surround-
ing it – the appearance of any 'natural order' is destroyed. Making up a museum is making
up the conditions under which a museum works. Those conditions are a critically personal
re-rendering of what a museum is and could be. The result, in this case, is Mr. Wilsons and
his team's Museum of Jurassic Technology.

Imitation and Action: The Museum of Natural History

Natural History Museums exist all around the world. As places of eco-Enlightenment pedagogy,
they have been reframed to tell 'our' stories of 'our' planet. Their collections contain historic
objects that are supposed to evoke the story of their times in the continuum of histories. The
storytellers are minerals and fossils, skeletons and butterfly wings, vases and spearheads,
garments and suits of armor – all animated by guides and mediators. These objects live in a
space of the institution that governs these stories. There, the invisible arrangements that hold
institutions together also control which objects are allowed to tell which stories. Alongside these
historic artifacts, politicians, scientists, and donors all add their own spin to these narratives.


      Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?, London: Zero Books, .
                      MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                  




The Natural History Museum is also a multiple. Museums of colonial-aristocratic origin with
similar names exist all around the world, names varying with local language, but all offering
features similar to each other in their specificity. Like Biennials and Galleries, they can be con-
sidered readymade forms to be used and adapted, nonspatial sites replicable and available
for occupation, histories to attach to, canons to disrupt or continue. The Museum of Natural
History is a way to address natural orders. As an emancipatory practice, museums are material
which is ripe for cooption by industrialists, but also for manipulation by artists and activists.

For a while in the year , there were two Natural History Museums in New York. The
first was located at Central Park West at th Street in the borough of Manhattan. The
American Natural History Museum is a monumental classicist building, structured into
several wings housing specific collections, one of which is the 'David H. Koch Dinosaur
Wing'. It is named after the Mr. Koch whose conglomerate of corporations was at one point
responsible for more than % of greenhouse gas emissions in the USA, the Mr. Koch who
might fund political groups that deny climate change or the theory of evolution, the same
Mr. Koch who is so fascinated with dinosaurs that he not only funded the Dinosaur wing
in New York with multimillion-dollar contributions, but also a similar section at the Natural
History Museum of Washington.

The other Natural History Museum in New York existed for a brief period in the summer of
. Motivated by the observation that a climate denier is on the board of an institution
that is supposed to teach us about the preservation of the environment, a group of activists
applied for funding, designed a logo, had green hats embroidered with it, painted it on
banners, and printed it on their tour bus. They instituted an alternative Natural History
Museum at the Queens Museum over the span of several months. It featured discussions
of institutional critique and offered narrated bus tours through the natural habitat of the
city, where instead of pointing out bird species, the script would focus on the 'insidious
entanglement of institutions and corporations' – with Exhibit A being the Koch broth-
ers entanglement with the Natural History Museum. Koch resigned amid controversy in
December , after  of the world's top scientists (including several Nobel laureates)
and more than , members of the public joined forces to urge New York's American
Museum of Natural History to kick climate denier David Koch off its board.

I interviewed Steve Lyons and Jason Jones of Not an Alternative and asked them how
practices which institute / are aware of their power to institute could be taught in schools
that educate artists and makers. They said the following:

    The NHM came out of a wager that we could split the museum sector by leverag-
    ing institutional legitimacy against it, that we would gain more power and influ-
    ence within the museum sector by speaking as insiders than by banging on the
    doors as activists. Of course, the threat of 'institutionalization' is real – if by that
    you mean the capture and neutralization of dissent. Every insurgency is met with
    counter-insurgencies. Every actual threat will face the force of power. The longer
    we last, the more symbolic power we gain, the higher the stakes in the struggle.
    The smash-and-grab interventionism of the past few decades made for good

      images and great anecdotes. But the struggle for power won't be won overnight. It
      takes persistence. The kind of insurgency we're engaged in can only work when
      the insurgents set concrete but escalating objectives and unwaveringly commit to
      the plan, the cause, and the horizon.

Commit to the horizon and foster a shared imagination, their statement suggests, but
never demand that the horizon has to be set in stone. It only has to guide a process of
making a community and making-public. The horizon might be an ideal, but the cause is
concrete: a critical emancipatory practice of liberating institutionalism from its occupation
by calcified power.

Graduates of art schools, curatorial programs, and technology degrees face a similar choice
today to the artists who instituted the MJT and the NHM. Will they, with their own talent
and productivity, subsidize the art market, the cultural industry, or the technology sector?
Or will they instead invest in the creation of communal spaces in which the spirit and
energies of 'socially engaged creative professionals and citizens of the postdigital age' are
not cut off by the reductive realities prescribed by institutional normative structures? Such
critical making-up of spaces and places for study are now being established, offering an
alternative to the degree mills backed by the technological-industrial sector.

Cautionary Tale of Occupational Utopias

Throughout my research, I keep coming back to this thought that Claire Pentecost shared
in a conversation on the articulation of utopian ideas:

      Utopianism is something in our heads, it's really in all of our heads but we're not
      really aware of it, but it is what gets us up in the morning and we're spending our
      efforts on. And the problem is that if you don't start to articulate your own idea of
      utopia you are servicing someone else's. Most of us are servicing a neoliberal uto-
      pia unless we are consciously trying to create other kinds of communities and value
      systems. It is like a horizon – and I'm not talking about Utopia that you actually
      build and police, those get a very bad name.

This 'getting up in the morning and spending our efforts on' resonates with my interest
in instituting as creative practice. Utopias as horizons – as distant and receding as they
seem – are points of orientation for a critical practice of daily life, or ways of life. Making
it up as building and instituting might also require an emancipated unlearning of what
criticality means in order to emancipate critical practice from 'someone else's' utopias.



      https://networkcultures.org/blog////call-for-contributions-the-critical-makers-reader/.





During a recent visit to CalArts, I had the chance to look at its archives, which document-
ed the foundation years of this Disney Corporation-endowed private art school. From the
very beginning, one of the newly instituted departments became a space where con-
ceptual radical art practice and emancipatory radical pedagogy converged: the School
of Critical Studies. It was an attempt to transmutate the perspective of Frankfurt School
Cultural Critique to the Millenarianism of s California. What can artists learn by
applying a critical perspective on the social order? And from that, what do artists need to
know in order to develop a practice that actualizes the demands of the time? What is the
kernel they could not do without, the one thing that would give their practice relevance
and the ability to reform life beyond the campus?




When I found the above paragraph in the School of Critical Studies course schedule -,
it made me wonder: had Bob Penny taught car repair as a critical-making skill for surviving the
Los Angeles area as an artist? Is the denoted specific invitation of women to be read as an eman-
cipatory gesture, or was 'Basic Car Repair' less mechanical than its course description suggests,
and much more an analysis of societal-institutional mechanics set on the vast CalArts parking lot?
As discussion of Critical Making must shed of its connection with paradigms of innovation and
production, and instead re-institute spaces for discourse and action in maintenance and repair,
this excerpt puts into words the utopianism that the School of Critical Studies at CalArts offered
in its early days – a generous ambiguity between radical pedagogical and critical artistic practice.

Judith Adler's study of that time and place in Artists in Offices offers a deeper reflection on the
schism between how institutions speak and how institutions think. I can only offer brief glimpses
into her 'dream analysis' of this California counterculture project. Based on fieldwork between
 and  , Artists in Offices provides a case study of one group of artists who responded
to the changes taking place in their occupations by attempting to institute a utopian art academy
where artists and pedagogues began to realize an 'Occupational Utopia'.

Seeking to outline a reason why artists would come to work in offices and bring along a strong
sense of Millenarianism and Communitarianism, Adler suggests that 'dissatisfaction with existing
institutions in the absence of faith in their reform' has led to a 'relief in a comforting conviction'
that these existing and dissatisfying institutions are results of a 'doomed past' and that 'until the
future has been consolidated, life can be passed in an alternative system'. Through this lens, the
free universities and tent cities served as escapist 'retreats for tired refugees and – in the end – as
testing grounds for later superficial innovation in the dominant institutions they meant to replace'.

This approach to instituting an occupational utopia at CalArts might be what Claire was talking
about in our interview. Once these pedagogical utopias become too real, too much effort is put
into realizing an ideal. They begin to fail their own aspirations. As exciting as the scene at CalArts
must have been in those years, perhaps the students and faculty were actually invited to join
the realization of someone else's utopia. Practices of critical making-things-up require liberation
from the Utopias which inform our preoccupations with our own occupations.

The school had a short-lived history. All too soon, it became clear to Adler that those seeking to
institute an avant-garde school and to maintain its credibility 'would find themselves inevitably
confronted with contradictions between the institutional imperatives of a school and the symbolic
imperatives of the avant-garde tradition they claim to continue and cite as the source of their
legitimacy'. As Adler's study details, the original program was halted for reasons deeply entangled
with the transformation of the school's governance structure . At that moment, it was crucial for
the first beginning to be over and for a new one to begin. The result, after several iterations, is
the School of Critical Studies as it exists today.



                       MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                          




Outro

I wrote some of this text at my desk in an applied sciences school that hosts my research
project. Not too long ago, this place was someone's idea, an idea involving someone's agenda,
with someone's belief in serving the state, motivated by someone's hope for a better future
for some next generation, limited by someone's epistemological limits and ways of life. I am
sitting in a place that was once made up, conceived by a commission on paper, but that now
services me with infrastructures, endows and obliges me with power, and offers free and
good coffee. Perhaps, as you are reading this, you are in a similar space or are on your way
to one or from there. Once this train of thought has begun – that everything was someone's
idea at some point – one could think that everything is made up in some way, that we are all
experiencing a kind of constructivist make-belief. We've grown skeptical of the sometimes
destructive habit of creativity that we developed in our brief time on this planet. The power to
create more things, more frequently, no longer feels right. Aren't there things and places that
grow into being without our heavy heart and clumsy hands? Perhaps destructive, but nonethe-
less necessary, is the practice of emancipatory politics that attempts to dissolve everything that
makes itself appear as a natural order while being artificial, such as institutions established
by previous collective demands for a better life. Today, thousands of homeless people evicted
by the tech bubble need to make the asphalt of San Francisco their home. Simultaneously,
coding camps invite urban transitory people to integrate themselves into gainful employment,
programs backed by the very same sector that is causing their eviction. The natural order of
things – between the haves and have nots, between those in-the-know and those who know-
to-get-through, between the makers and won't-make-its – is rendered awfully naturalistic, if
one dares to actually look and listen. What is it that is critical at this time to make up?

