

This formulation of grey media is explored in class by proposing that technical objects have
a directive side or could be considered desiring in philosophical terms. This can be thought
of more widely as how do we create a critical understanding of media interaction and the
formation or performance of power. The ability to manipulate the directive side of technical
objects through multiple scales of logics can be one place where the kind of evil described in
Fuller and Goffey's book resides.

This class explores how the directive side of technical objects can be thought through with
the design/individuation of the technical element and individuals, ensembles in a simplified
Simondonian sense. The space of a desiring technical individual is unfolded as it (among other
things) encourages us to alter our minds, behaviors, and bodies in order to better use them. Our
self-modification in response is often rewarded by allowing us to more clearly tune in to technical
objects and receive cleaner channels of information from them. The programming and use of
computers, for instance, implies both programming the machine in order to perform calculations
and regulating the conduct of users in manipulating mice and menu systems, ordering their
input to produce desired results.

The class as a whole is then encouraged to explore how people participate in the flows of power,
language, and logics created in collaboration with technical objects. They investigate how the pro-
cesses of these objects become normalized, and how we become entangled in their interrelations
across various scales. As we once again become unfamiliar with how software operates within
computation and culture more generally, it makes sense for the class to enquire into how such
logics operate in other realms: social processes, politics, economy, and the intrapersonal sphere.

Risk, Ethics and Critical Acts

The critical in Critical Technical Practice has its own genealogies, discourse, and armies of aca-
battlefield from time time and remix the devastation or causation for a class, I'm certainly not
intellectually or educationally equipped or sufficiently interested to reveal the intricacies of such
a mire in here. I leave this to my stunning colleagues, Prof. Matthew Fuller and Dr. Luciana Parisi,
who consistently feed the students' hungry appetite in this area. However, adjacent to discursive
threads of criticality, there are other forms that can be easily be transposed and digested in a
practice-based class. There are critical acts that surface from the struggle to survive and flourish
in an unfair world. There are critical acts created by tactical media, by the deranged, or those
taken from the fringes of art. Thinking with such critical acts, as discussed in the,
allows us to address the personal risk and ethics (or lack thereof) associated with them.

These forms of critical acts are multivalent in wider culture and it becomes important to both
value and interrogate the nature of such phenomena if we are to incorporate them into Critical
Technical Practice alongside intellectual critical threads. Students need to consider what might
constitute a critical act at the microscopic and macroscopic scale, and to chart how it functions
as a disruptor/constructor/enabler/disabler within culture and society. At the same time, students
need to discriminate between considered and unconsidered critical acts, their ethics and the
worth of personal or institutional risk.

One less considered example of a critical act that I came upon this year in my hometown was
that of Snakey, a paranoid -year-old who lives on an old  ft plastic boat. Snakey's boat had
been abandoned on the mud for  years with no facilities of any kind, no means of propulsion.
One night he just pulled it out of the Thames marsh and up on the mud alongside the locale
cockle sheds, where his estranged dad and brother run a successful seafood business. Snakey
eats and throws the rubbish out of his boat and urinates in used plastic drink bottles, throwing
them overboard when the tide is out. Snakey demonstrates his contempt for those who know
him and those who know he has committed something considered disgusting. People are forced
to witness his light yellow urine contained in plastic bottles, a stand in for his contempt for the
environment. He could have urinated straight in the sea like all the other men, but decided to
dirty his nest, to contain his bodily wastes for others to witness. In this way Snakey spontaneously
produces a critical act in a bottle that fractures the complacency of those that share this common
space. It is a powerful act, a declaration of bodily power that resists, exposes, and exploits the
preconditions that have created his current situation. It also creates an unbearable embarrass-
ment for his dad and brother.

The critical act of Snakey fractures complacency by introducing turbulence into cultural and
social 'common sense'. The unthinking equilibrium amongst people of the shoreline that blinds
society is temporarily broken. The energy/discord produced pulls into focus what conditions the
moment – not necessarily for Snakey but those that exist within the relations surrounding his acts.
The multivariate nature of critical acts and their interdependence with cultural and social norms
makes them a compelling subject of study, but not necessarily a model to follow.

Searching for someone else who fractures complacency, but who does it within a pedagogy
more closely related to the needs of Critical Technical Practice, I turn to the offerings of Mark
Fisher. Mark, formerly of Goldsmiths, was a working class intellectual of Felixstowe, a port town
on the East Coast of England. Mark, who sadly committed suicide earlier this year, was able
to think through contemporary culture and mental illness in order to illuminate contemporary
capitalism. His book Capitalist Realism drips with a politicized depression and bears witness
to the annihilation of vitality both in the depressed self and wider society in the early st century.
Fisher's politically depressed vision is not surprising given that his lens was grounded by the
exhilaration of people making culture for themselves without it first being apprehended by large
corporations and turned into free labour before you have even had a chance to think about it.
Or maybe his lens was tinted slightly pink, a nostalgic hue stemming from his solidarity with the
/ miners in the UK. This was the last time there was class-based political power outside
of an elected dictatorship, a power which arguably has now been supplanted by Facebook and
other social media.

Mark Fisher's book offers the class a critical realization of our own macroscopic entrapment within
a totalized capitalist imaginary, much like Snakey's piss bottle challenges the pre/conditions of
poverty and mental health at the microscopic level. Just as a critical act unfolds Snakey's piss
bottle into the relations that make it real, Mark Fisher's question – is there no alternative to Capi-
talist Realism? – requires us to question Capitalist Realism as a rubric of reproduction that keeps


 us mesmerized by a desiring consumption. It also begs the question that he usefully does not
 present: how do we figure the way Capitalist Realism performs itself through technical objects?
This question allows the class to ask another: is Capitalist Realism the only thing performed
 through such technical individuals? Mark effectively lays out a concise mapping and a challenge
– a landscape of desire, production, and consumption which in popular terms, technical critical
 practice can affirmatively engage with.
                       MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                            




         THE COUNTER-TESTIMONY OF THE MAKER
                                           MARIA DADA

This chapter begins with the question of critique. How and why do we critique – but more
importantly, why does no one critique effectively anymore? This sentiment is echoed by
Bruno Latour in the paper Why has Critique Run out of Steam? He states: 'It does not
seem to me that we have been as quick, in academia, to prepare ourselves for new threats,
new dangers, new tasks, new targets. Are we not like those mechanical toys that endlessly
make the same gesture when everything else has changed around them?' According to
Latour, the absence of principles is to blame. As he puts it, critique has battered through
all claims to a ground, eroding any sense of a solid foundation, and with it, a compelling
argument. The result is that there isn't even a sure ground for criticism. Without a ground,
it's hard to differentiate a rigorous critical claim from a conspiracy theory. That's why con-
spiracy theory books are best sellers. Latour mourns the death of critique. In its tattered
remains, a whole industry has sprung up, denying that the Apollo program ever took place.

Critique is a method and a mode of self-reflexive questioning which comes out of the age of
Enlightenment, an era which for the most part was comprised of thinkers that held reason
and reasoning in high regard. The purpose of critique was to question our understanding
of reason in order to keep it in check. Critique's task was to unleash our understanding
from the shackles of any particular dogmatic defining view. Whether we argue that the
Enlightenment has overinflated the power of reason (as counter-Enlightenment voices
would suggest), or narrowed it, the point is still the same: reason is misrepresented under
Enlightenment principles and critique is there to rescue it. My claim is that the absence
of principles transforms critique into an issue around the strength of evidence and the
credibility of the testimony. Effective critique is synonymous with the counter-testimony
of a reliable witness.

A witness is someone who is present at the time of an event, often a crime, and is able
to testify before the law. They are able to give direct evidence in relation to the events.
However, they often rely on foggy memories and blurred vision. It is not too difficult for
the defense or prosecution to put the reliability or credibility of the witness in doubt. Here
is where the role of making comes into play. More often than not, in the post-critical age,
a testimony or counter-testimony is not simply uttered, but is rather constructed. Latour
is the first to admit that a critique has to be made. As such, the eyewitness is no longer a
person but a photograph, a video, or other forms of surveillance. Juries are more decisive
when they are presented with the facts – the evidence submitted as an object as opposed
to the fuzzy testimony of a witness. Critique, or counter-testimony, is a material process
enabled by infrastructure. It is a practice-based question of physics, chemistry, and the
material forms of agency.



Given all this, I will further explore the role of critical making as counter-testimony. From the
aesthetic practices of forensics and counter-forensics to the role of labs in media archae-
ology and investigative practices, I will tell the story of makers that present their objects as a
counter-narrative to pressing sociopolitical issues. More importantly, however, I will address
the issue of how critical making practices can establish credibility in a world of fakes and a
general loss of belief.

The Problem of Critique

Heather Dewey-Hagborg's Stranger Visions appears as a collection of D-printed, life size, full
color 'portraits' which are computationally generated from traces of DNA extracted from the
hair, chewed gum, and cigarette butts left behind by everyday New York City pedestrians. Each
exquisitely constructed 'portrait' depicts what a single stranger might look like, a representation
based on their genetic profile. The project calls attention to increasingly sophisticated biological
surveillance mechanisms. The work can be framed as the creation of a critical maker, some-
one who gathers or produces objects, artifacts, words, and images as critique. But what's the
difference between an object of critique, the D-printed sculptures, and all the other objects
proliferating on the internet or in galleries that – by and large – are sophisticated in their own
right? What is critique in this context?

The issue that greatly affects the practice of critical making is that, at the moment, there is no
unified view on what a critical maker might regard as reason because Enlightenment critique,
through its incessant questioning, has dismantled most ideas around or grounds for reason. It is
unclear what form of reason is still held in high regard – if at all. Under such conditions critique
finds itself in trouble. You see, critique and reason go hand in hand; one acts as the means of
establishing the other. Without critique, one cannot reason with care; without reason, one has
no base from which to critique. If critique is in trouble, so too are critical makers. More than this,
with the crisis of uncertainty, hesitation and increasing skepticism, the disappearance of critique
becomes dangerous, impinging on our ability to effectively respond to climate change and other
global issues: political stalemates, international aid, immigration – the list could go on and on.

However, it is climate change that troubles the two theorists that I will discuss here. Both Bruno
Latour and media theorist Wendy Chun consider the loss of faith in science in the face of climate
troubles to be highly significant, and the primary reason to resurrect critique. I will start with Latour.
Latour believes that critical theorists have spent far too long refusing to engage with what he calls
matters of fact, what scientists would call brut fact or empirical facts. As he states in an article
from the  Critical Inquirer, the mistake is to think that the only way to critique matters of
fact is to move away from them.

As a result, these critical theorists never experience a complicated object, such as those found
in science and technology. Michael Serre, although far from critique, is one of the few thinkers
that takes the objects of science seriously, in an ontological and anthropological fashion.

                   MATTER THAT MATTERS: MATERIAL ENGAGEMENTS WITH A CAUSE                    




Other theorists and philosophers, however, seem to drink a lot of coffee and therefore the
only objects they seem to experience are jugs – an object that was philosopher Martin Heide-
gger's favorite object to reflect upon. Sometimes, in order to diversify their descriptions, they
employ rocks. But wouldn't it be more interesting, according to Latour, if instead of a rock
they described dolomite?

Because critical theorists don't muse upon sophisticated objects, they cannot see them as
what Latour calls matters of concern, something more akin to works of art or works of social
and historical significance. For instance, philosophers such as Martin Heidegger would
consider a handmade jug to be a matter of concern, but a can of Coke made in a factory is
only an object, a matter of fact. Matters of concern are those endowed with political meaning
or aesthetic significance.

 Unlike Heidegger, Latour believes that rich technical objects can be transformed into matters
 of concern. He cites the Challenger disaster of the s – the shuttle orbiter that broke
 apart seconds after attempting flight – as a perfect example of such a transformation, one
 that occurred in just  seconds. Conversely, matters of concern can also be transformed
 into objects or matters of fact. Consequently, Latour's method of critique entails transforming
 matters of fact into matters of concern. Isn't that exactly the task of the critical maker: to take
 objects of fact and transform them into objects of concern? While that may be the case, the
 task is not so simple. 'You can do one sort of thing with mugs, jugs, rocks, swans, cats, mats,
 but not with Einstein's Patent Bureau electric coordination of clocks in Bern', argues Latour,
'Things that gather cannot be thrown at you like objects'. When we transform objects into
 matters of concern, we weaken their claim to science. Matters of fact are thrown into doubt
 when they merge into highly complex historically situated matters of concern.

Why? Here Latour blames the methods of the social sciences and humanities. Matters of fact
are always portrayed in a ridiculous way in the social sciences (and we could add critical mak-
ing here), where critique has come to resemble a form of anti-fetishism, or the 'fairy position',
as Latour puts it. The fairy position refers to common arguments in the social sciences that
reveal the desires and wishes – the 'fairies' – falsely cast onto objects. The social scientist
or maker critic always shows the naive readers, as believers, that they are falsely projecting
their wishes and fetishes onto a material entity, the object. In other words, the critical maker
is attempting to reveal the ideologies and hegemonies that are projected onto the entity. 'Look
naive reader/viewer/idiot', the critic says, 'the forces that you are not conscious of are acting on
you'. But no one outside of the discipline is interested in what social scientists do to matters
of fact. No one cares about the societal rug being snatched our from under their fetishized
objects. No one wants these objects to be treated this way. Readers would rather stick to
matters of fact. More than this, such a form of critique is useless when it comes to objects
of some solidity. The projection game cannot be played on neurotransmitters, for instance.
The task is not to pull the rug from underneath matters of fact and reveal their conditions.
Such a move diverts the attention away from matters of fact onto what makes them possible
or impossible, a move that in Latour's view has been overdone. Nonetheless, critique is also


useless when it uses the results of science or matters of fact uncritically. Although Latour
somewhat condemns the fairy position, he is not advocating for its opposite, what he calls
the 'fact position' and what in the social sciences might be referred to as positivism. In sum,
fetishes don't work because we all have fetishes, and matters of concern don't work because
we've seen that they are fetishes.

Latour concludes that a new method has to be devised, one that does more than show that
objects are simply non-conscious societal projections of readers. Latour claims to be searching
for something along the lines of Andrew Pickering's mangle of practice:

     Not a flight into the conditions of possibility of a given matter of fact, not the addition
     of something more human than the inhuman matters of fact would have missed, but,
     rather a multifarious inquiry launched with the tools of anthropology, philosophy, met-
     aphysics, history, sociology to detect how many participants are gathered in a thing to
     make it exist and to maintain its existence.



Acting under Uncertain Conditions

For Wendy Chun, the issue is not that critical theorists no longer engage in matters of fact.
It is that we, as a form of information-seeking public, have come to expect an unreasonable
amount of certainty from our matters of fact, an amount of certainty that was not demanded
of the thinkers of the Enlightenment, an era when scientific doubt was welcome and formed
a huge part of the scientific process. According to Chun, we are in a 'CSI effect' era where
there are impossible expectations placed on science. CSI, or Crime Scene Investigation, is one
of the most watched television series in the world. In every episode, the CSI team manage to
close the gap between speculation and conviction by finding forensic evidence, DNA samples,
and fingerprints – all of which come together to irrefutably point the finger at a criminal. For
Chun, CSI investigations play out, mimic, or prefigure the thought process that demands the
closing of the gap between scientific evidence and scientific results. All the evidence must
point to the answer, beyond the shadow of a doubt. Systems of truth and justice play out in
the court of public opinion.

The unreasonable demand placed on reason and its matters of fact is a result of Enlight-
enment era critique and skepticism. It is because critique continues to batter the uncertain
grounds of reason that certainty becomes necessary. The request for certainty erases the fact
that debate and dispute are central to science. The selling of science as 'true' shuts down
debate. As a result, matters of fact have been disarmed. Initially devised to support science,
the tools of the Enlightenment are now being used against it. Consequently, climate change
has been predicted, but little has been done. For Chun, it's not a question of enriching our





matters of fact. The facts are known. The issue, then, is not about attaining more certainty on
climate change issues. The earth's temperature has been increasing since the s, and
the facts are all there. The issue is that we seem to have lost the ability to act within uncertain
conditions. We constantly expect reason to hand us certitude, to deliver up incontestable
certainty. Given these high expectations, conservative organizations and rogue scientists have
no problem injecting doubt into any issue. The debate can then be easily portrayed as science
versus politics. But that is not a productive ground from which to structure the debate. In
this murky fog of skepticism, critical makers, armed with critique, do nothing but amplify the
voices of the deniers, and the merchants of doubt become the scientists themselves.

For Chun, uncertainty needs to be enabling. Uncertainty is necessary in order for us to engage
in risk that cannot be seen or experienced. We need to make do without the notion that
uncertainty fosters inaction. If the public think that all the matters of fact need be gathered
in order to achieve certainty, that such a feat is even possible, they will try to do so – and be
paralyzed, frozen in inaction until they achieve this certainty. However, we have to be careful
not to reduce complexity to an incident that is easily solved or determined. Rather than adopt
the forensic logic of verification – a process that accrues evidence in demand for accuracy
and certainty – we need to work with hypothesis, a process that 'makes do' with suppositions
that prompt further action and investigation.

Extralegal Strategies and The Entanglement of Law and Norm

For both Latour and Chun, to act within the realm of reason is effectively to act within the
realm of scientific reason and matters of fact. It is the science of the Enlightenment that they
are both attempting to save from the clutches of uncertainty and conspiracy theory. For them,
science is that which single-handedly put an end to the authority of religion. In that sense, it
is the Enlightenment, and it is in trouble. But one thing that Latour and Chun seem to miss
is that science is not the only arena from which we can act with reason. Certainly matters of
fact are important, but these facts lack political meaning without any recourse to the norms
and values in which they operate. The philosopher Immanuel Kant, one of the fathers of cri-
tique, was also one of the first to realize the important relationship between reason, science,
and what might be referred to as matters of the law – that it is the laws of reason that are
the arbiters of empirical matters of fact, whether they be natural, moral, or juridical. When
elaborating on the importance of being able to act within the bounds of uncertainty, Chun
leans on the work of theorist Ulrich Beck. However, what she misses in her reading of Beck's
World Risk Society is that the limitation of the demand for certainty does not occur only within
the realm of science, but also within the bounds of the law. It is both science and the law that
fail to respond to catastrophes such as climate change.
