 Labs are Laborious.

In this provocation, we shift from considering who counts as a knower to who counts as a
laborer in a lab. What labor counts? How is labor equitably acknowledged and compensated?
How are attributions handled? How is rest ensured?




     Perspective', Feminist Studies , no.  (): p. .

The etymological root of 'laboratory' is the latin 'laborum' and 'laboratorium', for labor and
place of labor, indicating the degree to which embodied labor has historically been at the heart
of any lab work. However, too often labs continue to be structured hierarchically in such a
way that those performing the embodied labor of experimentation and testing are given titles
such as 'technician', 'intern', or 'research assistant', compensated with lower (or no) pay,
and left unattributed on lab outputs or listed at the end of a long list of authors while those
perceived to be performing the intellectual direction of the lab are placed at the top, with all
of its attendant privileges. A lab driven by feminist ethics must aim to acknowledge the labor
of all of its workers. This may include not only those laborers carrying out duties more directly
tied to research, but also those working in service of the lab and performing less legible labor
such as the cleaning staff, administrative staff, and marketing staff.

In terms of author attribution, some labs may choose to address unjust hierarchical assump-
tions by opting for a mostly flat model. To take just one example, they might choose to place
an asterisk next to all or some author names, indicating that those authors contributed
equally. These models are excellent in some cases. However, as Liboiron et al. point out,
non-hierarchical attribution can make it difficult for lab members to accrue publication val-
ue when seeking employment in academic institutions. We are particularly taken with the
methods the authors put forward from their own lab – the explicitly feminist, anti-colonial
Civic Laboratory for Environmental Action Research (CLEAR), methods based in 'a situated
and context dependent process that assumes decisions about author order will be different
for every paper'. The authors concretely outline methods for consensus-building that take
into consideration equity across the complex social, economic, and political locations of lab
laborers. We believe that such a system could be used not only for author attribution, but for
devising job titles that work to complicate hierarchies, and that suddenly make visible the
entire range of laboring that takes place in a lab.

Finally, appropriate attribution of labor must be paired with equally appropriate compensation,
as well as with boundaries for how much each lab member can be expected to work. Drawing
on Liboiron et al.'s guidelines for attribution, we believe that the creation of clear divisions
between work time and rest time should also be made via a process driven by equity (taking
into account how much people are able and available to work), consensus (open discussions
should be staged about equitable division of labor, weekly work hours, breaks, and holidays),
and care (all work hours should contain some flexibility to account for the physical and emo-
tional well-being, childcare requirements, and other needs of each member).

. Hierarchies Trickle Down to Knowledge.

Expanding upon issues of hierarchy, this provocation considers how hierarchy is negotiated
in the overall organization of a lab and its work. Here, we focus here on the hierarchies within
lab membership itself. But it is important to note that these points, as well as the labor and





attribution concerns addressed above, extend also to addressing hierarchies in external
community relationships, as well as with any human and non-human research subjects. As
we have already touched upon, distribution of power is a key concern for feminist methodol-
ogy. Given that the knowledge produced in labs is collectively shaped, power negotiation is
particularly crucial to ensuring that the knowledge practices of a lab represent the diversity
of its members. Decentralization of power might look different for each lab depending on
its size, institutional commitments, and the kinds of work it produces. For example, are lab
decisions made through a public or anonymous voting process? Are there elected or volun-
teer representatives who make decisions on behalf of member concerns? Must unanimity
be reached in voting?

Here, CLEAR again serves as a useful model, as the lab has outlined protocols for running
meetings and coming to agreement based on established methods of talking circles, facilita-
tion, and consensus-based decision making. Even when applying methods such as these,
however, conflict will inevitably arise in democratic negotiations, and how disagreements are
addressed is significant for establishing affirming feminist spaces. We will address conflict fur-
ther in the following section, but one helpful strategy for overcoming decision-making hurdles
is by outlining (and periodically re-outlining) the lab's mission and values, then considering
the decisions to be made against these values. Even seemingly mundane questions such
as how a lab represents itself in marketing collateral, or which sources of funding it may or
may not accept, are key to connecting a lab's work to its values, and should be considered
with intention in lab meetings. The MIT Media Lab, for example, has long embraced fund-
ing from ARPA, DARPA, and large corporations; and we also now know that the lab has
knowingly accepted large sums of funding money from known sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein
over the years. How does this reflect on the Lab's values, and how has it trickled down to
its research agenda?

Establishing shared values builds community, and building and maintaining community
in the lab can aid in the overall work of hierarchical negotiation. Cultivating community can
take many forms, such as regular check-ins or surveys that take stock of community member
needs, with clear follow-ups to address those needs. Community can also be addressed in
more unstructured ways, such as by encouraging and supporting social time. Some feminist labs,
such as Laura Devendorf's Unstable Design Lab, offer open 'playtime', where lab members can
informally talk and experiment. This kind of space for connecting knowledge-making work with



dialogue and 'lived histories' is useful for feminist community-building, as well as for feminist
knowledge-production, as Jacqueline Wernimont and Elizabeth Losh argue in their discussion
of feminist makerspaces: 'We do not separate "yack" from "hack" any more than one might
partition a "stitch-n-bitch"'. It is important to stress here, however, that even informal social
activities can reinforce hierarchies, as in Edison's lab, where community-building was more
akin to 'male bonding' according to Wershler et al., 'in a way that very much anticipates
contemporary tech/startup culture.'

. Safety Includes Affirmation.

This provocation emerges from questions about how to make a lab physically and emotionally
safe, as well as what safety means. How is the lab made into an affirming space for members,
visitors, and its extended community? Where can lab members turn for support?

Regardless of whether a lab is a digital humanities lab, media lab, wet lab, dry lab, hacklab,
fablab, or makerspace, it must be physically safe. A lab is, as Wershler et al. assert, 'a com-
plex assemblage of relational forces between its space, infrastructure, apparatus, techniques,
and people'. Inattention to any one of these elements – in the case of safety, an inattention
to people – creates a power imbalance not only between those who are safe (for example,
directors or administrators who might have little direct contact with lab equipment) and those
who are not safe (those who do have contact in the course of undertaking experiments or
creative work), but it also creates a power imbalance between a lab's space and equipment
and the people working there. What good is a lab if its materials are valued more than its
human participants? Thus, in terms of physical safety, labs must regularly take stock of their
exterior and interior infrastructure. Is the lab's electrical wiring up to its needs? Does it have
adequate ventilation and clear information and procedures about hazardous materials and
their disposal? Is it secure from intruders? Does the lab have a system in place for reporting
and addressing malfunctioning equipment?

Looking after the emotional well-being of lab participants is also critical, and begins by respect-
ing their identities and needs. Asking all lab community members to share their gender
pronouns should be standard practice as new members join. There should also be a forum
for members to note accommodations they might require in the lab, as well as religious
observances or other commitments that might affect their work schedule. Appropriate, clear
protocols for incorporating these needs into the lab's structure must then be established. Care
for lab participants is also grounded in the constant and careful maintenance of the lab as
an affirming space. What we intend here, after Jeannie Ludlow, is for the lab to go beyond
notions of 'safe space' in order to build an environment that is supportive for growth. As we
mentioned earlier, conflict and disagreement is inevitable in labs, and as Ludlow asserts,




feminist spaces are not always 'safe', in the sense that they challenge viewpoints and raise
sensitive topics. Ludlow argues instead for what she calls 'contested spaces', ones that are
not conflict-free but rather support respectful disagreement and tension. Cultivating the
lab as a contested, affirming space, is key for supporting productive conflict-resolution and
community-building. Emotional and physical safety must also be nurtured via a clear and
transparent reporting structure for breaches in professional behavior. A lack of transparency
about what happens in a lab, what constitutes professional behavior, and who may report to
whom can quickly produce an environment where abuses of power take place.

. Non-Humans are Community Members, too.

In this final provocation, we point to the more-than-human concerns that a feminist lab must
take up. As we have already mentioned above, labs and lab practices emerged out of scientific
value systems – systems which imposed worldviews onto knowledge production that were limited
in scope. Robin Wall Kimmerer highlights those limits in Braiding Sweetgrass, and she makes
clear how anti-colonial, feminist approaches can serve to bring neglected concerns back into
view, specifically, those of non-humans. She writes:

     In moving from a childhood in the woods to the university, I had unknowingly shifted
     between worldviews, from a natural history of experience, in which I knew plants as
     teachers and companions to whom I was linked with mutual responsibility, into the realm
     of science. The questions scientists raised were not 'Who are you?' but 'What is it?' No
     one asked plants 'What can you tell us?' The primary question was 'How does it work?'

We insist that all living beings impacted by a lab's work should be considered as part of its com-
munity. When a lab works with non-human subjects, ethical questions are readily noticeable;
however, we would like to point out that non-humans outside of the lab also require care. How
are the needs of our non-human planetary cohabitants taken into consideration in the lab's work?
How are ethical material usage and disposal taken into account (practices which can of course
also affect human animals, with marginalized groups disproportionately affected)? One example
that is alarmingly prevalent in labs is the use of plastics. Plastics are found widely across lab
disciplines – from the test tubes of biolabs to the circuit boards of hackerspaces. These implicate
a lab in the systemic extraction and waste practices currently affecting all of Earth's living beings.

In order to address questions of material usage and waste, we propose Amanda Starling
Gould's 'Digital Environmental Media Studies (DEMS)' framework as a useful starting point
to think with. While the framework is built around the digital, it can be applied to other



knowledge practices, as it encourages taking the full supply chain of sites of knowledge-making
into consideration, from beginning (such as minerals and plastics) to end (such as wastes and
toxicants). Reuse, repair, and other 'circular economy' practices are, as Isenhour and Reno make
evident, firmly tied to a feminist ethics of care, and are of vital importance to a feminist lab's work.

From Feminist Labs to Feminist Logistics

The provocations we have outlined here consider how models of thinking-together could bene-
fit from the application of feminist methodologies and approaches. While we have written them
for feminist labs, they can also be applied towards broader feminist logistics. How can human
and non-humans, together with technologies, spaces, and infrastructures, be organized into
collective feminist sites? To be clear, attending to these concerns can be time-consuming,
tedious, and perhaps worst of all – boring. Here we find useful Astra Taylor's call for doing
the laborious work of organizing, arguing that 'endless meetings, strategy sessions, research,
spreadsheets, [and] conference calls' are invaluable efforts in social justice work. We believe
these to be equally important for spaces of feminist knowledge-making and logistics.

We have also implicitly argued here for making lab practices and logistics visible, and thereby
accountable, to those who have been and continue to be written out of labs. However, as we
insist throughout, it is not simply a matter of diverse representation. While crucially import-
ant, this cannot, in and of itself, cure deeply embedded patriarchal, colonial, racist, ableist,
imperialist, ageist, and environmentally damaging assumptions. Rather, those assumptions
themselves must be addressed, as they are intrinsically tied to the infrastructure and admin-
istration of that crucial engine of knowledge production: the lab. Questions such as what
counts as expertise and who counts as an expert (in the words of Latour and Woolgar, an
issue of 'credit and credibility') remain of vital importance. Thus, by way of the preceding
six provocations, we end with a final challenge. What might be possible if we rethink not just
the who and what of labs, but the how?



Farrow, Ronan.'How an Elite University Research Center Concealed its Relationship with Jef-
frey Epstein', The New Yorker,  September , https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/
how-an-elite-university-research-center-concealed-its-relationship-with-jeffrey-epstein
Fleck, Ludwik. Genesis and Development of Scientific Fact, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
 ().
Fuller, Laurie and Ann Russo. 'Feminist Pedagogy: Building Community Accountability', Feminist
Haraway, Donna. 'Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial
hooks, bell. Feminist Theory from Margin to Center. Boston: South End Press, .
Isenhour, Cindy and Joshua Reno. 'On Materiality and Meaning: Ethnographic Engagements with
Kimmerer, Robin Wall. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge and the Teach-
ings of Plants, st edition, Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions, .
Knorr Cetina, Karen. 'Laboratory Studies: The Cultural Approach to the Study of Science', Handbook
Latour, Bruno, and Woolgar, Steve. Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, .
Liboiron, Max. 'How to Run a Feminist Science Lab Meeting', CLEAR blog, https://civiclaboratory.
nl////how-to-run-a-feminist-science-lab-meeting/.
Ludlow, Jeannie. 'From Safe Space to Contested Space in the Feminist Classroom'. Transformations:
Maguire, Patricia. 'Feminist Participatory Research'. In Alison Jaggar (ed) Just Methods: An Interdisci-
plinary Feminist Reader, nd edition, Boulder: Paradigm Publishers, .
Millard, A. J. Edison and the Business of Innovation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, .
'Pollution Affects Americans Unequally: Interview with Robert Bullard'. Union of Concerned Scientists,
 Catalyst (Spring ), https://www.ucsusa.org/sp-inquiry-robert-bullard.
Shapin, Steven. 'The House of Experiment in Seventeenth-Century England'. Isis, Vol. , No. , A
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples, nd edition,
London: Zed Books, .
Starling Gould, Amanda. 'Restor(y)ing the Ground: Digital Environmental Media Studies', Networking
Knowledge: Journal of the MeCCSA Postgraduate Network, . ( July ).
Taylor, Astra. 'Keynote', Rhizome Seven on Seven, New York, , https://rhizome.org/editorial//
may//seven-on-seven-.
Wernimont, Jacqueline and Elizabeth M. Losh. 'Wear and Care Feminisms at a Long Maker Table',
The Routledge Companion to Media Studies and Digital Humanities, Abingdon: Routledge, .
Wershler, Darren, Jussi Parikka and Lori Emerson. THE LAB BOOK: Situated Practices in Media Stud-
ies, Unpublished manuscript, in-progress.
Young, Iris Marion. Inclusion and Democracy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, .
Yusoff, Kathryn. A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, .

      Making It Up:
         Critical
      Practices of
       Instituting
      Bernhard Garnicnig
                      MAKING SPACES: LABS, INSTITUTIONS, AND AUTONOMOUS ZONES                   




MAKING IT UP: CRITICAL PRACTICES OF INSTITUTING
                                  BERNHARD GARNICNIG

This text exists because of the proximity between the terms 'critical making' and 'making it up'.
The text examines cases in which artists 'made up' spaces and places that take on institutional
and corporate forms. In these cases, this making-up is understood as an emancipatory appro-
priation that actualizes artists and citizens relations to institutions or corporations. Copying and
mimicking the heraldry, ornament, and jargon of institutions is considered as a means towards
reaching an eye-level position with corporations or bodies of governance in order to address them
with the intent of political transformation. The following examples allow us to reflect on each of
their distinct approaches to the understanding of 'criticality'. These allow reflection on how such
inventive mimicry might need to be approached. Rather than attempting utopian improvements,
this practice of making spaces coproduces the slippages that occur once infrastructures attempt
to adopt and dissolve their difference.

Meeting a Bootstrap Museum Director

I met David H. Wilson, the founder of the Museum of Jurassic Technology, in their upstairs tea
room. Just minutes earlier I had finished watching a film in their screening room, a portrait of
the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston. The film was shot with the idea of portraying
the museum through its maintenance personnel, as well as emphasizing the invisible relations
between objects around which its founder had arranged the exhibit. David was very fond of this
museum and mentioned it as if it were a sister from a different mother, with both siblings sharing
a profound love for museums and the poetic power of constellations.

I inquired into how his museum got started and the practicalities of running it today. He proudly
pointed out that everyone who worked with him could earn three times as much elsewhere,
yet many of his employees have stayed on the team for years. In that moment, an employee
needed Mr. Wilson's attention. Once again, the rain in this unusually wet winter had surprised
the homeless man who dwells in their unused entrance to the expansion building. A brief
exchange followed, centered on a soggy sleeping bag. Who owed whom how many dollars from
the last time it was brought to the coin laundry to dry, and had a new one been purchased for
him? The conversation became a logistical one, as often happens in environments where a lot
of small things get done quickly to achieve something big. Who is going to get him a new and
dry sleeping bag, and where will they try to dry the old one? In that moment, it quickly became
clear that the MJT had become much more than a made-up museum. It had become a space
that takes on an institutional function, integrating methods and practices critical to their time
and location. Amongst other things, this allows them to create desirable working conditions that
their community decides – through persistent investment of their time and talent – to be the
right thing. These conditions prove to be non-threatening and desirable beyond that organization.

After the conversation with David, Hana, the administrative director and archivist, led me outside
through a fire escape back door, onwards between two Airstream trailers, and into a space that
houses a workshop, office, and eclectic archive. She pointed out many articles and stories that
