
The Red Sneaker
?
A
s I dance alone in a sunlit bog, the ground beneath my feet rolls in slow waves. For a long seasick moment my foot hangs in midair, waiting for a solid place to 
stand. Every step sets off a new undulation, like walking on a waterbed. I reach out to steady myself, grabbing a branch of tamarack, but I've stood too long in one place and the cold water rises around my ankle. The bog sucks at my foot and I drag it out with a slow sucking sound, my leg coated to midcalf in black muck. I'm glad I left my boots back at the top of the esker. An old red sneaker of mine lies somewhere in the depths, lost on another research trip several years ago. Now I go barefoot. Apart from its proclivity for stealing footwear, a quaking bog is a lovely place to spend an August afternoon.
  The ring of trees at the perimeter walls off the bog from the rest of the forest. The circle of Sphagnum glows green like a firefly against the wall of dark spruce. Here, the seen and the unseen worlds our elders speak of coexist in close proximity, the sunlit surface of the bog and the dark depths of the pond. There is more here than meets the eye.
  The lands of my ancestors are dotted with kettle hole bogs among the forests of the Great Lakes. The Anishinabe people conduct their ceremonies using the Water Drum, a drum so sacred that it is not to be viewed by the public. Deerhide stretched across a bowl of wood filled with sacred water, the Water Drum "signifies the heartbeat of the water, of the universe, of creation and of the people." The wooden bowl gives honor to the plants, the deerhide honors the animals, and the water within the life of Mother Earth. The drum is bound with a hoop that represents the circle in which all things move; birth, growth, and death, the circle of the seasons, the circle of our years.
  There is no ecosystem on earth where mosses achieve greater prominence than in a Sphagnum bog. There is more living carbon in 
Sphagnum moss than in any other single genus on the planet. In terrestrial 
The Red Sneaker   
habitats, mosses are overshadowed by the vascular plants and assume relatively minor roles. But in bogs they are supreme. Sphagnum or peat mosses not only flourish in bogs, they create them. The acidic, waterlogged habitat is hostile to most higher plants. I know of no plant, large or small, which has the ability to engineer the physical environment more thoroughly than Sphagnum through the remarkable 
properties of the plant itself.
Every bit of ground in a bog is blanketed in 
Sphagnum. Actually, it's not ground at all. It's only water, cleverly held by the architecture of moss. I am walking on water, on a mat of Sphagnum moss that lies over the surface of the pond. Some of the pool is still visible at the center of the bog, a flat dark surface. Bog ponds are unusually 
Individual Sphagnum plant still and glassy. The dark water draws your eye downward, in search of the unseen. No current disrupts the reflections of summer 
clouds, since the only source of water is rainfall. No stream runs in or out of this island of Sphagnum. The water is clear, stained the color of root beer with humic and tannic acids released from the slow decay of Sphagnum.
  An individual stem of Sphagnum is reminiscent of an English sheepdog after a swim in the pond, dripping puddles onto the floor. Sphagnum has a great moplike head, the capitulum, held above the water. The rest of the plant is concealed by long, pendant branches that hang from the nodes of the stem. The leaves are tiny, just a thin membrane of green and they cling like sodden fish scales to the branches. If the mat is disturbed, Sphagnum even smells like a wet dog as sulfurous vapors are released from the muck below.
Porous cells of 
Sphagnum
reproduce and yet they are integral to the success of the plant. Their sole function is to hold water, lots of water. If 
  What amazes me most about Sphagnum is that most of the plant is dead. Under the microscope you see that every leaf has narrow bands of living cells which border the patches of dead cells, like green hedgerows around empty pastures. Only one cell in twenty is actually alive. The others are merely dead cell walls, skeletons surrounding the open space where the cell contents used to be. These cells aren't diseased; they achieve their mature, fully functioning status only when they are dead. The walls of the cells are porous, peppered with tiny pores like a microscopic sieve. These perforated cells can't photosynthesize or 
you grab some Sphagnum from the seemingly solid surface of the bog, it comes up dripping. You can wring nearly 
a quart of water from a big handful of Sphagnum.
  By allowing the dead cells to fill, Sphagnum can absorb as much as twenty times its weight in water. Its tremendous water-holding capacity allows Sphagnum to modify the ecosystem for its own purpose. The presence of Sphagnum causes the soil to become saturated, filling the spaces between soil particles that might otherwise hold air. Roots need to breathe, too, and the waterlogged peat creates an anaerobic rooting environment which most plants can't tolerate. This impedes the growth of trees, leaving the bog sunny and open.
  The lack of oxygen in the sodden mat below the living Sphagnum also slows the growth of microbes. As a result, decomposition of the dead Sphagnum is extremely slow; it may persist relatively unaltered for centuries. The buried portions of the Sphagnum plant simply remain, year after year after year, gradually accumulating, filling the pond. My red sneaker, if I could find it in the depths of the bog, would not have decayed at all. Odd to think that a sneaker would outlast a person. In a hundred years, it may end up being the most tangible sign of my brief presence on the planet. I'm glad it was red.
  This preservative effect yielded a stunning find for peat cutters who unearthed perfectly preserved bodies from a peat bog in Denmark two thousand years after burial. Archeological studies revealed these were the remains of Tollund people, Iron Age villagers known as the Bog People. Burial in the bog was no accident. Evidence suggests that these people were sacrificed in agricultural rituals, life offered up in exchange for a bountiful harvest. Their faces are surprisingly serene and their presence speaks the understanding that life is renewed only through death.
  A side effect of the slow decomposition is that the minerals bound up in living things are not easily recycled in a bog. They persist in the peat as complex organic molecules that most plants can't absorb. This leads to severe nutrient deficiencies that exclude many vascular plants which can't tolerate the infertility. Most of the trees which do manage to take root in a bog are yellow and stunted, as a result. Nitrogen is in especially short supply, but some bog plants have evolved special adaptations to deal with this limitation: eating bugs.
   Bogs are the exclusive homes for insectivorous plants like sundews, pitcher plants, and Venus' fly traps which perch on the Sphagnum mat. Deer flies and mosquitoes are plentiful in a bog and each one is a flying packet of concentrated animal nitrogen. The sticky traps and elaborate pitchers evolved to capture this nitrogen for the plant, gaining by carnivorous leaves what its roots could not provide.
  Sphagnum is thorough in its manipulation of its environment. Not only does it produce waterlogged, nutrient-poor conditions; it also changes the pH, just for good measure. Sphagnum acidifies the water in which it grows, making it inhospitable for other plants. Release of acids allows Sphagnum to absorb scarce nutrients for its own use. The water at the edge of a bog may have a pH of ., equivalent to dilute vinegar.
  The acidity contributes to the antimicrobial properties of the moss. Most bacteria are inhibited by low pH. Because of this and its unsurpassed absorptive abilities, Sphagnum was once widely used as bandages. In World War I, when cotton supplies were limited by warfare in Egypt, sterile Sphagnum became the most widely used wound dressing in military hospitals.
  The asymmetric ratio of : between living and dead cells in a single plant is mirrored in the structure of the entire bog. Most of the bog is dead, unseen. A Sphagnum bog is made of two levels, the deep dead peat and the thin surface of living moss. Only the top few inches of a Sphagnum plant are alive. The sunlit green capitulum and this year's branches are just the tip of a long, long column of Sphagnum tissue which may 
Individual stretch several meters into the bog. Each year the living leaf of layer grows upward, farther and farther from the waters Sphagnum
below. But the pendant branches droop downward, the dead cells wicking water up from the depths, carrying it to the living layer above. 
  Beneath this is the peat, the partially decomposed remains of Sphagnum plants that used to be on the 
Clustered branches of Sphagnum
living surface. The dead mosses are compressed by the weight of the water and the plants above, 
forcing them downward into the depths. This is the foundation of the bog, a huge sponge, holding 
water and steadily passing it upward, from the unseen to the seen.
  Peat has a long history of human use, ranging from therapeutic baths in ancient Greece to ethanol generation today. Burning bricks of dry peat was an important heating source for many northern peoples. It is the smoke of slowly smoldering peat permeating malted grains that gives scotch whiskey its rich taste of autumn. The distinctive flavors of single malt scotches are said to originate in the qualities of the local peat cut from a particular moor. Peatlands are drained all over the world for growing certain specialty vegetable crops, like lettuce and onions. 
  The major commercial use is as a soil additive for gardens. I once had a garden at the edge of a floodplain, and the soil was so full of clay, we could have opened a pottery shop. I bought bales of peat to till into the soil. The fragments of organic matter help to keep the clay particles apart from one another, lightening the soil. People also dig it into their gardens to increase the water-holding capacity of a garden soil by the absorptive nature of all those dead cells. It can also be a sponge for nutrients, promoting their slow release to plants. Opening a bag of peat releases the scent of the bog. When I crumble the peat between my fingers, I remember its story, where it came from. The dry brown fibers that now see the light of day spent centuries beneath the dark water of the bog. And before that, they had a brief existence at the green surface, where dragonflies dove after mosquitoes snatching them away from the sundews. Commercial peat is mined from bogs that have been drained, some by nature, most by design. My garden and I are complicit in that enterprise and it troubles me. I prefer a bog wet and squishy between my toes.
  Going barefoot is the best way to know a bog. Your feet will tell you things your eyes cannot. At first, the pillow-soft surface of the bog seems homogeneous, but as you walk through it, its complex pattern becomes apparent. There may be as many as fifteen different species of Sphagnum here, each with subtle variations in appearance and ecology. You don't really walk through a bog; it's more like barely controlled lurching. Your feet tentatively probe each spot, testing whether it will hold you before committing to a step, lest you join the bog people in becoming an artifact of history.
  Kettle hole bogs are arranged in concentric circles of vegetation, rings of increasing age from the youngest edge of the open water to the high hummocks beneath the old tamaracks. The pattern is the product of the passage of time and Sphagnum's power to transform the environment. Right at the pond's edge, at the youngest part of the bog, are Sphagnum species that live no place else, nearly submerged in the highly acidic water. The appearance of a solid mat is only an illusion. It is floating, dangling from the edge and even the weight of a bullfrog will push it under.
  If you back carefully away from the edge, the mat becomes thicker, grown dense with the accumulating layers of moss. In the summer sun, it feels like a warm sponge beneath your feet. As you sink deeper, your toes curl around the submerged roots of bog-loving shrubs, running under the Sphagnum mat like taut wire springs beneath a soft mattress. Out here on the open mat, the Sphagnum rests on this framework. There are certain species of Sphagnum which inhabit only this zone of the bog, which is not usually submerged and therefore a bit less acidic. As the shrub roots continue to grow out toward the pond, these mat species will follow it, eventually closing in and hiding the open water under a Sphagnum blanket. 
  The next ring in the concentric circles of vegetation is the hummock zone. It's not quite so bouncy, since the depth of peat accumulation is greater in this older part of the bog. Here the difficulty in walking comes not just from the risk of sinking, but from uneven terrain. The bog surface is marked with hummocks of thick vegetation and thin spots in between. This is the spot where you might wish you had your shoes. The Sphagnum mat is mingled with dead branches of shrubs, hidden beneath the soft moss surface and waiting to put you in line for a tetanus shot. Hummocks are formed by the interaction between the Sphagnum and the shrubs as each struggles for primacy. Just like your feet, the shrubs start to sink into the mat under their own weight. The surrounding blanket of Sphagnum sends shoots into the lower branches of the shrub, and wicks up water from below. This makes the shrub even heavier and it sinks some more, burying those branches. The cycle continues, the shrub growing upward, and the Sphagnum weighing it down. Eventually a cone-shaped hummock of shrub and moss builds up above the surface of the bog mat, as high as eighteen inches. In many cases the shrub dies, but its branches remain, entombed in the hummock.
  At the small scale of mosses, the hummock presents a range of microclimates, analogous to the elevational zones of a high mountain. The bottom of the hummock is submerged in the mat, acid and soggy, while the top has become isolated from the water. The nature of Sphagnum allows water to be wicked up to the summit of the hummock. Nonetheless, the top is considerably drier, and less acidic. Not surprisingly, there are different species of Sphagnum, which inhabit each of these zones, creating a layer cake of mosses, each one adapted to the specific microclimate of the hummock slope, from the valley floor to the alpine summit. The presence of these small microclimates and the species of Sphagnum adapted to them are what contribute to the high biodiversity of bogs.
  If you lay a hand on the hummock top, it's warm and dry on a summer day. Let your fingers probe downward and it gets progressively cooler and wetter. It's possible to reach your arm all the way through the hummock and into the peat below. It may be as much as fifty degrees cooler than the surface, since the dead air spaces in dry moss make an excellent insulator. The cold temperatures also slow decomposition. Traditionally, people who lived in the boggy taiga would utilize the cold peat as a refrigerator for freshly killed game. When I was an undergraduate, one of my professors, Ed Ketchledge, used to torment we students with this phenomenon. We'd be on a bog field trip, struggling in the heat and swatting deerflies, sipping from our tepid canteens. He'd calmly step over to a certain hummock, reach down inside and pull out a cold beer that he had stashed there on his last visit. That's a lesson not soon forgotten.
  The hummock tops are often dry enough that Sphagnum can no longer live there, and other mosses will colonize. These high hummocks provide the only spots where trees could get established, with their roots up above the saturated peat. You see little seedlings of tamaracks and spruces perched on top. A few of them actually succeed, and begin to form an open bog forest. Another group of Sphagnum species flourishes under these trees, where the peat is deep and solid.
  In these thick peat deposits, paleoecologists can read the history of the land. They slide a long shining cylinder into the bog, cutting through layers of undecomposed plants, and extract a core of peat. By the plants that are present, the pollen grains trapped there, and the chemistry of the organic matter they can discern the changes in the land. Changes in vegetation, changes in the climate, stretching thousands of years before, are all recorded there. What will they read in the layer that represents our time, our evanescent moment at the surface? We are responsible for that.
  I love listening to a bog, the papery rustle of dragonfly wings, the banjo twang of a green frog, the occasional hiss of sedges moving in the breeze. On a hot summer day, if you're very quiet, you can witness the smallest discernable sound I know-the "pop" of Sphagnum capsules. It's hard to imagine that a sound emitted by a capsule only one millimeter long could be audible. Their capsules, tiny urns on a short stalk above the moss, explode like a popgun. The heat of the sun builds up air pressure inside the capsule, until the top blows off, propelling the spores upward. In the stillness, listening intently, I thought I heard the sound of the Water Drum.
  A quaking bog feels to me like the living embodiment of the Water Drum, the mat of Sphagnum, stretched across the surface of the water, held in a granite bowl carved by a glacier. The Sphagnum is the living membrane stretched between two shores, creating a meeting place for earth and sky, embracing the water within. I am standing quietly on the surface of an earthly Drum, my feet supported by the floating Sphagnum, responding to the smallest movement, rippling under my shifting weight. I start to dance. In the old way, heel and toe, in slow tempo, each footfall rippling across the bog and answered by the returning wave rising to meet my step. My feet make a drumbeat on the surface and the whole bog is set in rhythmic motion.
  The soft peat below responds to my step, compressing with the downbeat and springing back. It too is dancing deep beneath me, sending its energy up to the surface. Dancing on the Sphagnum, buoyant on the surface of the peat, I feel the power of connection with what has come before, the deep peat of memory holding me up. The drumbeat of my feet calls up echoes from the deepest peat, the oldest time. The pulsing rhythm, persistent, wakens the old ones and as I dance I can hear their faraway songs, the songs of the Water Drum in the medicine lodge, the songs they made winnowing wild rice on the shores of a vast blue lake, mingled with the voices of loons. Emerging like a vapor from the deep peat of memory come the farewell songs and the cries of the people marched off their beloved homelands, prodded down the Trail of Death at the point of a bayonet that brought them to the drylands of Oklahoma where no loons sang. Up, up through the peat, up through time their voices are rising, voices of the good sisters of St. Mary's teaching the red children their duplicitous catechism. 
  Dancing, sending the message of my presence through the peat, I can feel in response the rumbling vibration of the train wheels rolling eastward, carrying my grandfather, just nine years old, to Carlisle Indian School, where they dance to the persistent rhythm of "Kill the Indian to Save the Man." Dark peat, dark times, when the Water Drum nearly lost its voice. Memory, like peat, connects the long dead and the living. Spirit, like water, was wicked up from below, hand to hand from the watery depths to the parched surface where my grandfather lived in boarding-school barracks, sustaining him. They did not Kill the Indian. For today, I am dancing, on a Water Drum of peat in a country of vast blue lakes where loons are calling. Dancing, my feet sending the message of my presence in waves through the peat, and in waves of memory, they send back the message of their presence. We are still here. Like the living surface of the Sphagnum, the sunlit green layer at the top of a column of dark accumulated peat, individually ephemeral, collectively enduring. We are still here.
  Maybe my presence need not be marked by more than my red sneaker. Just by continuing, I honor the lives of my ancestors and form the foundation for my grandchildren. We are profoundly responsible for one another. When we gather and dance in the elder's footsteps, we honor that link. When we steward the earth for our children, we are living like Sphagnum.
  
Portrait of Splachnum
?
T
he jet stream flows through the stratosphere like a muddy river. It cuts from one shore and deposits on the other, homogenizing its load of sediment. Swept 
along in the current are airborne seeds and spores, keeping company with vagrant spiders. Every continent is awash in the same aerial plankton. The wonder is not that the earth should be so richly populated, but that it is not everywhere the same. Somehow, each wandering spore finds its way home.
  This global cloud of spores powders every surface with the possibility of mosses. I saw the same species in my driveway in upstate New York that I encountered the next morning in the sidewalk cracks of Caracas. This same species chinks cracks in the cinder blocks of Antarctic outposts. It is not the proximity to the equator that matters, but the singular chemistry of pavement which makes a home.
  The boundaries that define where a particular species of moss calls home are often more narrow. Some are strictly aquatic, some are terrestrial. Epiphytic mosses restrict themselves to the branches of trees, but some epiphytes settle only on sugar maples and others only in the rotten knotholes of sugar maples growing on limestone. There are generalists that are ubiquitous on any patch of open soil, and specialists which favor the dirt tossed up by the diggings of pocket gophers in the tall-grass prairie. Some saxicolous (rock-dwelling) mosses can live on granite, others only on limestone and Mielichoferia only on rocks containing copper.
  But no moss is more fastidious in its choice of habitats than Splachnum. Absent from the usual mossy haunts, Splachnum is found only in bogs. Not among the commoners like Sphagnum that build the peaty hummocks, not along the margin of the blackwater pools. Splachnum ampullulaceum occurs in one, and only one, place in the bog. On deer droppings. On 
Portrait of Splachnum   
white-tailed deer droppings. On white-tailed deer droppings which have lain on the peat for four weeks. In July.
  I've never found Splachnum by looking for it. Days before my moss class was scheduled to begin, I would go to a quaking bog in the heart of the Adirondacks in hopes of finding a patch to show my students. I'd found it there before, but only when I was looking for something else. Squishing through the muck my footsteps would release the faintly sulfurous gases. I searched over the carpet of peat, finding pockets of rare pitcher plants, sundews, and spider webs stretched over the branches of bog laurel. I found plenty of deer droppings, and coyote scat too, but the tidy piles of brown pellets are empty.
 While all are very rare, any bog could have as many as three different species of Splachnum residing there. Splachnum ampullulaceum inhabits the droppings of whitetailed deer. Had a wolf or coyote followed the scent of the deer into the bog, its droppings would have been colonized by another species, S. luteum. The chemistry of carnivore dung is sufficiently distinct from that of herbivores to support a different species. If a moose 
leaf of 	strode through the bog, and made a contribution to 
Splachnum the local nitrogen economy, its droppings would be of little use to either of the other Splachnum species. The moose droppings have their own loyal follower. 
  The family to which Splachnum belongs includes several other mosses with an affinity for animal nitrogen. Tetraplodon and Tayloria can be found on humus, but primarily inhabit animal remains such as bones and owl pellets. I once found an elk skull lying beneath a stand of pines, with the jawbone tufted with Tetraplodon. 
  The set of circumstances that converge to bring Splachnum into the world is highly improbable. Ripening cranberries draw the doe to the bog. She stands and grazes with ears alert, flirting with the risk of coyotes. Minutes after she has paused, the droppings continue to steam. Her hoof prints leave indentations in the peat, which fill with water and leave a trail of tiny ponds behind her. The droppings send out an invitation written in wafting molecules of ammonia and butyric acid. Beetles and bees are oblivious to this signal, and go on about their Portrait of Splachnum   
work. But all over the bog, flies give up their meandering flights and antennae quiver in recognition. Flies cluster on the fresh droppings and lap up the salty fluids that are beginning to crystallize on the surface of the pellets. Gravid females probe the dung and insert glistening white eggs down into the warmth. Their bristles leave behind traces from their earlier foraging trips among the day's dung, delivering spores of Splachnum on their footprints.
  The spores germinate quickly in the wet droppings and trap the pellets in a net of green threads. Speed is of the essence. Growth must outpace the decay of the droppings, or else the moss will find itself without a home beneath its feet. The nutrients in the dung speed development, so that in just a few weeks the dung is concealed beneath a lawn of pure Splachnum. Like all other plants, mosses are confronted with choices about the allocation of their energies to growth or to reproduction. Investment in long-lived stems and leaves can pay large dividends in the future, allowing the plant to elbow aside competitors and maintain its dominance in the community. Reproduction is then delayed, while the limited energy supply is used to fuel growth. This strategy is effective in stable habitats, where the opportunities for reproduction stretch into the future. The habitat is likely to outlast the moss. But where the habitat is transient, the plant benefits most by investing its energy in mobility. Getting stuck in a disappearing habitat is a sure means of local extinction. The plant must quickly produce a crop of airborne spores, to disperse itself to new habitats, before the old one deteriorates. Splachnum is a just such a fugitive species, quickly colonizing one dung pile and then fleeing to the next when the droppings rot away. 
The urgency for departure pulses through a developing 
        Splachnum colony. With remarkable speed among the snailpaced mosses, the sporophytes seem to appear overnight. Capsules burgeoning with spores rise above the leaves, each pushed upward on an elevated stalk. No other moss puts on such a gaudy display of unbridled reproduction. Splachnum In unmossly shades of pink and yellow, the capsules tower over the leaves and wave in the breeze. The capsules swell to bursting and exude a sticky mass of colored spores. More modest mosses rely on the wind to carry their offspring, and the wind needs no extravagances to attract it. Since Splachnum can grow only on droppings, and nowhere else, the wind cannot be trusted with dispersal. Escape of the spores is successful only if they have both a means of travel and a reserved ticket for a particular destination. In the monotonous green of the bog, flies are attracted to the cotton candy colors of Splachnum, mistaking them for flowers. Rooting about in the moss for non-existent nectar the flies become coated with the sticky spores. When the scent of fresh deer droppings arrives on the breeze, the flies seek it out and leave Splachnum-coated footprints in the steaming dung. And so, on some dewy morning when I am picking blueberries in the bog, a Splachnum bouquet will appear, unbidden, at my feet.

The Owner
?
T
he letter had no return address. I'd been summoned by an invisible man, with an offer I couldn't refuse. 
The letter, on thick white paper, requested my "expert 
services as a bryologist, to consult on an ecosystem restoration project". It sounded pretty good.
  The goal was to "create an exact replica of the flora of the Appalachians, in a native plant garden." The owner was "committed to authenticity and wished to ensure that mosses were included in the restoration." Not only that, he requested "guidance on matching the correct species of moss to the proper rock types in the landscape." That was to be my task should I accept their generous offer. The letter had no personal signature, just the name of the garden. I read the letter again. It sounded too good to be true. There are few people interested in ecological restoration, let alone restoration of mosses. One of my research interests at the time was to understand how mosses were able to establish themselves on bare rock. This invitation seemed like the perfect match. I was intrigued by the project, and as a new professor, I was admittedly flattered by the prospect of using my expertise and getting paid consultant fees to do it. The letter had an air of urgency about it, so I made plans to go as soon as possible. 
  I pulled over to the roadside to unfold the directions which lay on the seat beside me. My instructions requested precise punctuality and I was trying to oblige. I'd been driving since dawn to reach this lovely valley, where bluebirds dove across the winding road into impossibly green pastures of June. An old rock wall ran beside the road and even from the car I could admire the mossy cover it had amassed over its long life. Down South, they call these "slave fences" in acknowledgement of the hands that laid the rocks. A century's worth of Brachythecium softens the edges and the memory. The directions had me follow the stone wall until the chain-link fence began. "Turn left to the gate. It will open at 
The Owner   
: a.m." Indeed, just as I arrived, the massive gate rolled smoothly away to the side, responding to some unseen commander. It was startling to find such security in this valley, which seemed more suited to horsedrawn wagons than electric eyes. 
  I started up the steep hill, gravel crunching under my tires. I had four minutes. Around a bend in the road, I could see a rooster tail of dust against the blue morning sky. It was creeping up the hill ahead of me so slowly I know I'd be late. Around the switchback, laboring up the hill, I got a glimpse of what I was following. My brain rejected the image. Trees don't move. But there it was again-the bare spring branches of a tree visible against the hillside, and it was heading uphill. I could see clearly now. It was an oak tree, riding piggyback on a flatbed truck. Now this was not a standard nursery-size tree with tidy burlapped root ball. No, this was a big old granddaddy oak. We had one like it on our farm in Kentucky, a huge burr oak with low spreading branches that cast a pool of shade the size of a house. It took two of us to reach our hands around it. There is no way you can move trees of this stature. And yet here it was-strapped to a truck like a circus elephant on a parade float. The root ball was twenty feet across and tethered to the truck with steel cables. The truck pulled over and steam rose from under the hood as I passed by, staring. 
  The road ended in a lot full of construction vehicles, all with engines running. The scraped earth was surrounded by a collection of barns and open-doored garages. I parked next to a row of dusty Jeeps and looked around for my host. There were dozens of people moving about, at a frenetic pace that reminded me of an anthill disturbed. Trucks were loaded and sped away. Most of the workers were dark and small. They wore blue jumpsuits and called to each other in Spanish. One man stood out in his red shirt and white hardhat. His folded arms announced that he was waiting for me and that I was late.
  Introductions were brief. Looking at his watch, he commented that the owner monitors the use of consultants' time carefully. Time is money. He pulled the radio from his belt to inform some higher authority of my arrival. I was handed off to a young man who emerged from an office in the barn. His shy smile and warm handshake felt like an apology for the brusque welcome and he seemed eager to escort me away from 
  
the center of activity. This was Matt, fresh out of college with a newly minted horticulture diploma. It was his second year working on the garden and it was he who had petitioned the owner to invite in a moss consultant to help with his assigned and somewhat overwhelming task of moss restoration. Matt knew that his work had high visibility in the design of the garden. Apparently the owner was especially fond of mosses, so the pressure for success was high. His goal was botanical accuracy in the plantings, and erasing the newness of the garden by introducing mosses throughout the landscape. Matt strode ahead and I followed, down a newly poured sidewalk through the construction site. He wanted me to look first at the moss garden. We could cut through the house to get there, since the owner was not at home.
  The brand-new house had the look of an old manor and was surrounded by huge trees set into the bare soil: tulip poplar, buckeye, and a gnarled sycamore. Each was anchored by guy wires and black tubing ran through the canopy. The oak I had met on the road had arrived and a gaping hole stood ready for its roots. It would stand right outside a wall of leaded glass windows. "I didn't know you could buy trees that big," I said. "You can't," Matt replied. "We have to buy the land and then dig them up. We have the biggest tree spade in the world." He watched the shock on my face for a moment and then looked away, picking sheepishly at his hands, and then recovered his professional demeanor. "This one came in from Kentucky." He explained that every tree was treated with chemicals to reduce transplant shock and then a drip irrigation system was installed in its canopy. It operated on a timer and delivered a spray of nutrients and hormones to stimulate root growth. The garden had a team of expert arborists, and they had not lost a tree yet. The entire grove around the house had been transplanted, trees cut from their soil by enormous tree spades and trucked here to restore an ecosystem.
  Matt disarmed the security system with a swipe of a card and we passed into the air-conditioned dimness of the house. This side entryway was a virtual gallery of African art. Carved masks and geometric weavings lined the walls. A cowhide drum, a wooden flute stood on stone pedestals and I stopped and stared. "It's all authentic," Matt told me, proudly. "He's a collector." He stood by as I looked around and let my amazement polish his status.  Each piece was labeled with its village of origin and the name of the artist. It was an impressive display. At the center of the atrium in a discreetly alarmed case spotlights were focused on an elaborate hairpiece. Its intricate design of bees and flowers was carved from luminous ivory. I was immediately struck by how out of place it seemed on its velvet platform, more like a stolen treasure than a work of art. How much more beautiful it would have been in the black oiled hair of the artist's wife. And more authentic. In a display case, a thing becomes only a facsimile of itself, like the drum hung on the gallery wall. A drum becomes authentic when human hand meets wood and hide. Only then do they fulfill its intention. 
  We passed through a vaulted room holding the swimming pool and I was unquestionably dazzled. The pool stood in a room decorated with hand-painted tiles and lush tropical vegetation. The marble floor glowed and the pool gurgled invitingly. I felt as if I had walked onto a movie set. Lounge chairs were casually placed around the pool, thick towels folded and ready for the convenience of guests. The stemware 
Mnium cuspidatum arranged on the patio tables was exactly the same ruby color as the towels. "The owner will be here this weekend," Matt said, waving his hand at the preparations. We finally made it to the kitchen, where I was offered a drink of water from a Dixie cup.
  The courtyard garden at the center of the house was Matt's first concern. He walked a little taller through the lush green he'd created. Every manner of tropical plant was there: birds of paradise, orchids, tree ferns. Paving stones made a path completely carpeted by Mnium. It was a spectacular array of feathery green as smooth as the mossy lawn of a Japanese garden. He'd been having trouble keeping the moss alive and constantly had to go back out to the woods to get more to maintain the unbroken surface. So we spoke of water chemistry and soil conditions as he scribbled in his notebook. I was feeling useful at last, giving advice on matching the right moss species to the garden environment so that it might naturally regenerate itself. I cautioned him about the ethics of wild gathering. The woods shouldn't be a nursery for his garden. His garden would be successful only when it became self sustaining. At the center of the garden stood a sculptured rock taller than either of us and beautifully covered with mosses. Each carefully chosen clump accented the irregularities of the boulder. An eroded pocket in the rock was filled with a perfect circlet of Bryum. The artistry rivaled any piece we had seen in the gallery and yet it struck the wrong note; the collection was only an illusion of nature. Plagiothecium can't grow in crevices like that, and Racomitrium wouldn't share a habitat with Anomodon, despite the beauty of their colors side by side. I wondered how this beautiful but synthetic creation passed the owner's standard of authenticity. The mosses had been reduced from living things to mere art materials, ill used. "How did you get these to grow like this?" I asked. "It's very-unusual," I hedged. Matt smiled like a kid who had outsmarted his teacher and answered, "Superglue."
  Moss gardens are a demanding exercise and I was impressed by what they'd accomplished. But where was the ecosystem restoration that all those trucks and workers were devoting themselves to? When at last we went outside there was no native plant garden, just the bare skeleton of a golf course under construction. A little tornado of dust rose up from the bare ground. The cart paths were lined with great slabs of rock placed in anticipation of the grass to come. The rocks themselves were beautiful behemoths of mica schist, the native bedrock which glittered like gold in the spring sunshine. A drainage pond had been cut into the golf course and was bordered by a wall from which the rocks had been recently quarried in terraced steps. 
  Matt led me up to the top of the quarry wall and we looked out over the scene. Bulldozers scraped and shoved, reshaping the land for the play of the game. Matt explained that the owner didn't like to see the raw rock around the pond. It looked as if it had just been blasted, which in fact, of course, it had. The owner requested that I give them a method for growing mosses to carpet the quarry wall. "It's the backdrop for the golf course and the owner wants it to look like it's been here for years," explained Matt. "Like an old English course. The mosses will make it look old, so we need to get them growing". It's way too big to use Superglue.
  There are only a handful of moss species that can colonize the harsh surface of acidic rocks and none of them is exactly luxuriant. Most form brittle, blackish crusts that are well adapted to withstand the stressful environment, but which would not even be noticed by a passing golfer. The black color of mosses which grow in full sun is produced by anthocyanin pigments which shield the plant from the damaging ultraviolet wavelengths that their shade-loving counterparts can avoid. I explained that moss growth depends heavily on a supply of water that this bare rock wall simply didn't possess. Without moisture, even centuries of moss growth would yield only a black crust. "Oh, that's not a problem," Matt responded. "We can install a misting system. We could run a waterfall over the whole thing, if that would help." Evidently, money was no object. But it was not money that the rocks required, it was time. And the "time is money" equation doesn't work in reverse.
  I tried to be diplomatic in my answer. Even with a watering system, the green carpets envisioned by the owner would take generations to grow. In fact, growth itself was not the issue. The critical step in moss growth comes at the birth of a colony. I'd spent considerable effort in researching how mosses decide to take hold of a rock. We have an idea of "how," but the "why" is very poorly understood. Wind-blown spores, finer than powder, must be stimulated to germinate by just the right microclimatic conditions. Raw rock is inhospitable to mosses. The surface must first be weathered by wind and water, and then etched by the acids produced by a lichen crust. The spore then forms delicate green filaments called protonema, which attach firmly to the rock. If they survive, tiny buds will form and sprout into leafy shoots. In experiment after experiment, we see that the probability of a single spore ever producing a single moss shoot is vanishingly small. And yet under the right circumstances, and given enough time, mosses will blanket a rock, like the old stone slave fence. So creating a colony of moss on a rock is no small feat, a mysterious and singular phenomenon which I have no idea of how to reproduce. Much as I would have liked to be the successful problem-solving consultant, I had to deliver the bad news. It couldn't be done. 
  Each time we changed locations, Matt would call in on the radio. I wondered who would care exactly where we were. We walked back up to the house where truckloads of huge rocks were unloading. "This is where they'll build the terrace," said Matt. "The owner wants mosses to grow on all these rocks, too. It will all be shaded, so do you think we could grow them here? With a mist system installed?" Matt pressed his case. If giant oaks could be transplanted, why not mosses? Couldn't you get mosses on the rocks simply by transplanting them? If you could provide the right shade and water and temperature, shouldn't they survive? Again, the answer was not what the owner would want to hear. 
  You'd think that, without the complication of having roots, moving mosses to a new home would be quite simple. But mosses are not like the plants in my perennial bed that I can move about the garden like rearranging furniture. A few soil-dwelling mosses like Polytrichum can be transported much like a grass sod, but rock-loving mosses are inordinately resistant to domestication. Even with the greatest care, moss transplants from rock to rock are generally doomed for failure. It may be that dislodging them tears nearly invisible rhizoids or crushes cells beyond repair. Or our studied duplication of their habitat is lacking in some key ingredient. We don't really know. But they nearly always die. I wonder if it's a kind of homesickness. Mosses have an intense bond to their places that few contemporary humans can understand. They must be born in a place to flourish there. Their lives are supported by the influences of previous generations of lichens and mosses, who made the rock into home. In that initial settling of spores they make their choice and stick to it. Relocation is not for them.
   "Well, what about sowing them, then?" Matt asked. He looked so hopeful. This was his first job, with a demanding boss and a nearly impossible task. I felt compelled to meet his hope halfway and, perhaps, to salvage his expectations of my supposed expertise. 
  There's no good science to suggest how to start mosses on rocks, but there are reports of a kind of moss magic in the folklore of gardeners. It's worth a try, I suppose. Garden enthusiasts have long looked for ways to speed up the growth of mosses on rock walls, to induce bare rock to assume the patina of mossy old age. I've heard of dousing the wall repeatedly with acid. Supposedly, it dissolves the surface of the rock and creates tiny pores where mosses can gain a foothold. In a way it mimics the action of lichen acid, slowly eating away at the rock. Other gardeners swear by swabbing a slurry of horse manure over the rocks. It's a bit rank at first, but the mosses seem to follow in short order. The most common recommendation is much more hygienic, a moss milkshake. The recipe goes like this: collect the moss species of interest from similar rocks in the forest. Be sure to take only mosses growing in the same conditions that are found in your garden. The same kind of rock, the same light and humidity. No cutting corners allowed, the mosses will know the difference. The moss is then placed in a blender with a quart of buttermilk and whirred to a green froth. Painting this mixture onto rocks is said to yield a coating of moss within a year or two. There's a great variety of recipes out there, some using yogurt, egg whites, brewers yeast, and other household items. Hypothetically, there's some sense to these concoctions. Mosses can indeed regenerate themselves from severed leaves and stems. Under the right conditions a fragment will put out proonema to anchor itself to the new substrate and tiny little shoots can arise in 
this way. Mosses propagate themselves this way in nature, so perhaps a blender will help the process along. Many mosses prefer an acidic habitat, which might be provided by the buttermilk, at least until the first rain. 
  Since Matt was grasping at straws, I promised to write up the recipes for moss milkshakes, but cautioned that I had little confidence in any technique to grow instant moss. 
  We strolled along the site of the new terrace, just talking. There was a rocky flower bed along the path, full of native spring wildflowers. There were trillium and bellwort and a whole patch of leaves which I recognized as lady's slipper. Protected species, every one. Was this what they meant by an ecological restoration? A flower bed? I asked where the plants had come from and along with a "none-of-your-business," look I was assured that they'd been bought from a nursery which grew all their own plants. Indeed, each still had a nursery tag. Not a single one had been taken from the wild, he said with emphasis. 
  All day, Matt had made a concerted effort to adhere to a closemouthed professionalism, but gradually his natural ease and openness couldn't be held back. He reminded me of my own students, eager to be out in the world and make a difference. This position was his first job offer and it had seemed too good to be true. The work was creative and he was better paid than he had thought possible for a rookie. After he'd been here for a year or so, he had had some doubts about the way things worked here and thought about moving on. But the owner had offered him a raise, if he'd stay. He'd just bought a nice little house and had a baby on the way, so he'd be around for awhile.
  Back in view of the man in the white hardhat, Matt picked up his pace and strode across the construction yard like a man with a purpose, speaking into his radio. I followed along behind and hoped that I too presented the image of a busy professional. "Time is money," I heard him say in my head. We headed down one of the many roads that ran from the yard like spokes of a wheel. 
  When we were out of sight of the buildings, Matt looked once more over his shoulder and slowed down. "Do you mind if we walk cross-lots?" he asked. We stepped off the road into the trees and in only a few steps the smell of diesel was washed away by the smell of the spring woods. 
In the concealment of the trees, he visibly relaxed. He grinned as he turned off his radio with a conspiratorial look and stuffed his hat into his back pocket. We suddenly felt like kids sneaking off from school to go fishing. "It's not too far," he said. "I want you to see what the native mosses are like here. Maybe you could tell if they're the right ones for trying to plant on the terrace. I'd like to try that milkshake method." He led me cross-country through the oak woods. In places, there were rocks strewn on the forest floor and I paused to look at their mosses. Matt was impatient. "We don't need to bother with these, the good stuff is right up here." He was right.
  At the top of the rocky ridge, the land fell away sharply to a shady glen below. We scrambled down over the ledges of the massive outcrop, taking care not to scuff up the carpets of moss. The Appalachian bedrock here was folded and contorted by eons of geologic pressure, and then rearranged by the action of glaciers. The result was a fractured stone sculpture of unlikely angles, a cubist painting of a mossy landscape. The surface of each rock was etched by time into crevices like the wrinkles on an old man's face. Black trails of Orthotrichum traced the crevices, and thick beds of Brachythecium lay on the moist ledges. I thought I could see here Matt's inspiration for his superglued creation in the garden. It was lovely, a breathtaking tapestry of old mosses. Matt showed off every nook and cranny of the outcrop with evident familiarity. I suspect he'd played hooky and come here more than once. "This is exactly what the owner wants it to look like up at the terrace," he said. "I brought him here once and he just loved it. I just need to find a way to get it to grow like this up at the house." Somehow, I was getting the impression that I had not communicated the problem very well. One more time I launched my explanation of the relationship between time and mosses. The moss beds on this outcrop were probably centuries old. If it were possible to exactly duplicate this microclimate, and then sow these same species in a moss milkshake, you might have a chance. But, even then it would take years. Matt wrote it all down.
  We walked back out to the road and checked our watches. Our appointed hours for consulting were over. Matt confided that the owner was extremely frugal and, especially with hiring outsiders, schedules had to be adhered to. The workers were climbing into trucks where they'd be driven down to the front gate, which was locked at  p.m. Standing by the cars, Matt gave me instructions from the owner about the report he would like to receive in three days' time. Before I left I had to ask, since no one ever said his name. "Who is the owner? Whose idea is behind this project?" His practiced answer came back quickly without his meeting my eyes. "I'm not at liberty to say. He's a very wealthy man." That much I had deduced. 
   Driving out to the gate, I scanned the landscape for signs of the ecosystem restoration I had never seen. But all I saw was the house and the golf course. It was too good to be true. I puzzled over the namelessness, the invisibility of this powerful man who had amassed all these resources to make a garden. Was this the anonymity of a discreet philanthropist or the concealment of a notorious identity? 
  My imminent departure was radioed ahead and when I reached the edge of the property, the gate opened and smoothly shut behind me.
?
Back at my office I wrote up an innocuous little report. I tried to educate The Owner as to the near impossibility of the task he proposed. All the money in the world won't get mosses to grow quickly on bare rock. That takes time. I included a species list of all the species we had seen, their environmental requirements, and guidelines for choosing the right species for a moss garden. Like a good academic, I suggested that if they really wanted to grow moss on rocks they should consider underwriting a cooperative research project. And I included the milkshake recipes for buttermilk and manure-who knows?  
  A few weeks later I got my check in the mail. I can't say that I felt very pleased with the work. What had been advertised as an educational project in vegetation restoration looked suspiciously like a tax shelter to landscape the new home of a wealthy man with a love for mosses and a passion for control. There may well have been good restoration work going on, off where the men in trucks were going, but I never saw it.
  So I was surprised when Matt phoned me a year later. He asked if I could come down and help again. He said they'd made a lot of progress and he was eager to show me the garden. When I arrived he was nowhere to be seen. I was escorted off by a brisk young woman who had been delegated to show me the gardens. I asked about Matt, and she said he'd been reassigned to another project, maybe the azalea garden. She whisked me over to the house. "The Owner wanted you to see what they've done with the mosses on the terrace. We just finished last month." 
  What a transformation had been wrought. The place had aged a century in only twelve months. The Kentucky oak looked as if it had been born there and green lawns had materialized over the construction rubble. Where the pile of bare rocks had stood last spring, there was now a stunning replica of the native flora of an Appalachian ridgetop. Flame azaleas with sinuous trunks cast a light shade over the dark rocks, placed in a convincing jumble so that pitch pines appeared to emerge from the deep crevices. Clusters of bracken fern and myrica gale posed along the pathways which led to gatherings of weathered garden chairs. It did indeed look old. And much to my amazement, every rock was upholstered with mosses, lovely thick carpets of exactly the right species. Brachythecium capped the rocktops, with Hedwigia trailing down the sides. Orthotrichum artfully followed the etched ridges in the stone, like black calligraphy on old parchment. It was breathtaking. It was perfect in every detail. It was two weeks old. Perhaps I'd better rethink the merits of moss milkshakes, if this was the outcome.
  My attendant was not much interested in my effusive praise of the garden. She was on a schedule and hurried me off to a patio on the other side of the house. It was a beautiful expanse of flagstone paving under the transplanted trees. "The Owner would like to know how to get rid of the moss that keeps coming up between the stones," she said, and waited with pen poised over notebook. I had no answer. All this work to get mosses to grow in one place, but where they spontaneously appeared he wanted them exterminated.
  Back we went to the main staging area where earth-moving machinery rolled in and out. The squawking radios, uniformed men, and sense of urgency made it feel like a military operation. The hard hat sergeants rode around in jeeps while open trucks of Guatemalan infantrymen bearing shovels and pruning saws were carried away, all under the orders of the Owner. 
  I too was bustled into a Jeep and we bounced along a rough new road, cut like a gash into the oak woods. A driver had been sent for me, but offered little in the way of information as to where we were going. I wondered if I'd get to see Matt. The driver barked into his radio that we were nearly there. The makeshift road ended in a small clearing where a bright yellow crane stood. Empty pallets were stacked in the sun. In the shade of the perimeter were mysterious figures shrouded in burlap and wrapped with baling twine, like so many statues waiting to be unveiled. A cluster of muscled men stood in the woods, with their hard hats bowed together in consultation. One came forward and enthusiastically introduced himself as Peter, a designer specializing in natural rock. He was just ever so glad to see me because they needed advice before proceeding any further. He was here from Ireland and spoke with a lovely lilt. The Owner had brought him over especially for the job. He was concerned that they might be botching the moss bit and so would I come take a look? We joined the clustered men and they took their time sizing up the newcomer, the moss lady. 
  These gentlemen were introduced to me as the precision explosives team. They'd been sent for from Italy, a crack group of stonecutters. Before us stood the object of their scrutiny, a craggy rock outcrop covered deep in mosses. I recognized it immediately as the beautiful little glen where Matt had brought me the previous year. Half of it was gone. They were quite a dedicated team. Peter, the rock designer, would select the sectors of the cliff which were most beautiful, a place where a quartz vein ran through the schist and the mosses were especially well placed. The stonecutters would then carefully calculate the position for the precision charges and blow the rock off the cliff face. Lesser men then hoisted the rock with the crane and placed it on a pallet where it was wrapped in moist burlap to protect the precious mosses. I suddenly understood that the lovely rocks on the terrace owed nothing to applications of buttermilk. I felt my hands grow clammy.
  They had so many questions. Should they burlap the rocks before the blast? Was Peter choosing correctly-would these particular mosses survive the move? How long could the mosses stay wrapped? Could I work with Peter to make recommendations about exactly where to place each rock for the well-being of the mosses? The Owner was upset that the mosses seemed to lose vigor once they were placed in the landscape. The cost of extracting each rock was very high and he didn't want to waste a single one. They considered me a new member of their team, hired to do this thing. I scanned all their faces for a sign of dissension but I saw only eagerness to get the job done. I felt numb, and somehow trapped as the Owner's hired gun. I had never dreamed that my advice would be put to such a use, that I would become an unwitting consultant for destruction.
  The workers were very thorough in their care of the stolen mosses, and genuine in their concern for their well-being. They were watered and carefully swaddled in burlap for their removal. They'd do whatever I told them to help them survive. Once separated from their homes, the mosses seemed to sicken and the lush green turned to yellow. The Owner didn't want to waste money transplanting rock if the mosses were going to die. So, they had set up a triage area to try and nurse the likely candidates back to health and cull out the ones who wouldn't make it. The facility was a big white tent set up in a meadow alongside the road back to the house. It looked for all the world like a field hospital set up for the wounded. Shade screens were rolled down the sides to maintain humidity within. Mist nozzles sprayed out jets of water. No expense had been spared. Lying on their pallets were the blast-scarred rocks with their mosses lying sickly upon them.
  My task was to make diagnoses and write the prescriptions. Which could safely be moved to the house and which should be abandoned? I thought of the doctors consigned to meet the slave ships at the shore. They would inspect the human cargo to pick out the healthiest for sale, the ones most likely to survive in their transplanted environment. And which was the lesser evil? To be sold into bondage or to be left behind to die? I wandered among the ailing rocks and felt as dislocated and powerless as they were. I wanted to shout at them to stop, but it was too late. And I was an accomplice to this. I don't remember what I said. I hope I said to save them all. 
  I wanted to see the Owner and confront him face to face with this betrayal, but he was invisible. Who was this man who would destroy a wild outcrop lush with mosses so that he might decorate his garden with the illusion of antiquity? Who was this man who bought time and who bought me? The Owner. What was this power of facelessness, so that no one uttered his name?
  I am trying to understand what it means to own a thing, especially a wild and living being. To have exclusive rights to its fate? To dispose of it at will? To deny others its use? Ownership seems a uniquely human behavior, a social contract validating the desire for purposeless possession and control.
   To destroy a wild thing for pride seems a potent act of domination. Wildness cannot be collected and still remain wild. Its nature is lost the moment it is separated from its origins. By the very act of owning, the thing becomes an object, no longer itself. 
  Blowing up a cliff to steal the mosses is a crime, but it's not against the law, because he "owns" those rocks. It would be easy to call this abduction an act of vandalism. And yet, this is also a man who imports a team of experts for the gentle wrapping of mossy rocks. The Owner is a man who loves mosses. And the exercise of power. I have no doubts of his sincerity in wishing to protect them from harm, once they conformed to his landscape design. But I think you cannot own a thing and love it at the same time. Owning diminishes the innate sovereignty of a thing, enriching the possessor and reducing the possessed. If he truly loved mosses more than control, he would have left them alone and walked each day to see them. Barbara Kingsolver writes, " It's going to take the most selfless kind of love to do right by what we cherish and give it the protection to flourish outside our possessive embrace".
  When the Owner looks at his garden, I wonder what he sees. Perhaps not beings at all, only works of art as lifeless as the silenced drum in his gallery. I suspect that the true identities of mosses are invisible to him and yet he wanted authenticity more than anything. He was willing to pay huge sums to have authentic moss communities at his doorstep where his guests might praise his vision. But in possessing them, their authenticity is lost. Mosses have not chosen to be his companion, they have been bound.
  I was dropped back at the staging area, with the coolness reserved for a team member who won't play the game. I was wearily walking to my car when I saw Matt getting into his truck. He was friendly enough and said that he'd been reassigned to another project. Mosses were no longer his responsibility, he said, with bright conviction in his face. But, knowing my interest, he wanted to show me just one more thing. He was on his way home, no longer on the Owner's time. So we got into his battered pickup and he clicked off his radio and its constant demands. We talked of his baby daughter and of azaleas but not of the terrace garden. He drove me through the woods to the far edge of the property along the security road. The boundary was marked by a four-strand electric fence angled outward to foil deer and other intruders. The entire perimeter beneath the fence had been treated with Roundup, killing all the vegetation. All ferns, wildflowers, shrubs, and trees had been eliminated in a ten-foot swath. All were dead except the mosses. Immune to the chemicals, the mosses had taken over, colonies coalescing into a crazy quilt in a thousand shades of green. Here was the real moss garden of the Owner, a mile from his house living under an electric fence in an herbicide rain. 
  
The Forest Gives Thanks to the Mosses
?
F
rom the windswept silence of Marys Peak, you can see the struggle unfolding. The land that stretches to the ocean, sparkling seventy miles distant, is broken into 
fragments. Patches of red earth, smooth blue green slopes, polygons of bright yellow green and amorphous dark green ribbons sit uneasily side by side. The Oregon Coast Range is a patchwork of clear-cuts and the second and third generations of Douglas-fir coming back with a vengeance. The landscape mosaic also includes a few scattered remnants of the original forest, the old growth that once stretched from the Willamette Valley to the sea. The landscape spread out before me looks more like ragged scraps than a patterned quilt. It looks like indecision as to what we want our forests to be.
  The conifer forests of the Northwest are renowned for their abundance of moisture. The temperate rain forests of western Oregon receive as much as  inches of rain a year. The mild rainy winters let trees grow all year round and, with them, their mosses. Every surface in a temperate rain forest is covered with moss. Stumps and logs, the entire forest floor is greened with wildly tangled turfs of Rhytidiadelphus and translucent clumps of Plagiomnium. The tree trunks are feathered with plumes of Dendroalsia like the breast of a great green parrot. Vine maple shrubs arch over under the weight of curtains of Neckera and Isothecium two feet long. I can't help it, my heart beats faster when I come into these woods. Perhaps there is some intoxicating element in moss-breathed air, transmuted in its passage through glistening leaves. 
  Indigenous people of these forests, and all over the world, offer traditional prayers of thanksgiving which acknowledge the roles of fish and trees, sun and rain, in the well-being of the world. Each being with whom our lives are intertwined is named and thanked. When I say my morning thanks, I listen a moment for a reply. I've often wondered if the land any longer has reason to return gratitude toward humans. If forests 
The Forest Gives Thanks to the Mosses   
did offer prayers, I suspect they would send thanks to the mosses.
  The beauty of mosses in these forests is much more than visual. They are integral to the function of the forest. Mosses not only flourish in the humidity of a temperate rain forest, they play 
Neckera pennata, an epiphytic moss a vital role in creating it. When rainfall meets a forest canopy, its potential routes to the ground 
below are many. Very little precipitation actually falls directly to the forest floor. I've stood in a forest during a downpour and been as dry as if I had been holding an umbrella. The raindrops are intercepted by the leaves, where they slide off toward the twigs. At a junction, two drips meet and then two more, forming tiny rivulets at the confluence of branches. Like tributaries of an arboreal river, all flow toward the stream running down the trunk of the tree. Foresters call this water coursing down the tree "stemflow." "Throughfall" is the name for water which drips from branches and leaves.
   I like to pull up my hood and stand close to a tree trunk in a rainstorm and watch the progress of the flood. The first droplets sink into the bark like rain into thirsty soil, the corky layers absorbing moisture. Then the gullies of the bark are filled to overflowing, until the water leaves their banks and sheets over the entire surface. Miniature Niagaras form over ledges in the bark, sweeping bits of lichen and helpless mites in the torrent. Passing over twig and branch it picks up sediment along the way. Dust, insect frass, microscopic debris, all are swept along, dissolving in the water so that stemflow is far richer in nutrients than the pure rainwater from which it began. In effect, the rain washes the trees and carries the bathwater straight to the waiting roots. This recycling of nutrients from the rinsed bark to the soil keeps the valuable nutrients in the tree and prevents their loss from the forest floor. The soil gives thanks to the mosses. 
  Like pillowy sandbags set in the way of a river, the clumps of moss also slow the passage of rain down the trunk of a tree. As water flows over mosses, much of it is absorbed into the tiny capillary spaces of the clump. Water is held in tapered leaf tips, funnelled into tiny drain pipes to the concave basins at the base of every leaf. Even the dead portions of the colony, the old leaves and tangled rhizoids, can trap moisture. The amount of rain held in Oregon mosses has never been measured, but in a mossy cloud forest in Costa Rica the mosses absorbed , liters of water per hectare of forest in a single rainfall. It's easy to see how flooding follows quickly on the heels of deforestation. Long after the rain has gone the mossy tree trunks remain saturated and slowly release last week's rain. When a shaft of light comes through the canopy and focuses on a clump of moss, you can watch the steam rise. Clouds give thanks to the mosses.
  Mist rolls in each evening from the sea. High in the canopy, the mosses are poised to gather it like silver berries. The intricate surface of a moss colony becomes beaded with moisture as hair-like leaf points and delicate branches invite the condensation of fog droplets. In addition, the cell walls of mosses are rich in pectin, the same waterbinding compound that thickens strawberries into jam. The pectin enables mosses to absorb water vapor directly from the atmosphere. Even without rainfall, the canopy mosses collect water and slowly drip it to the ground, keeping the soil moist for the growth of trees, which in turn sustain the mosses.
?
I like paper. I like it a lot-its weightless strength, its inviting blankness. I like how it waits, the clean white rectangle framed by the smooth oak of my desk. The oak grain ripples and catches the light like no petroleum byproduct ever could. I like the pine paneling in my cabin and the smell of woodsmoke on an autumn night. But despite my love affair with forest products, a log truck going by on the highway makes me sad, especially on a rainy day when clumps of moss still cling to the trunks, watered by the dirty spray of passing semis. Just days ago, when those logs were still trees, these same mosses were full of forest moisture and not the diesel wash thrown up by tires on I-.
  I can't help but poke at my own inconsistency, like a tongue probing at a loose tooth. I surround myself with real forest products, yet rail against the clear-cuts my desires create. In Oregon, clear-cuts are the "working forest," the blue-collar trees that yield my neat stack of paper and the roof of my house. I'm caught in the same conflict that we see on the fragmented landscape. I decided that I needed to confront my ignorance and go visit a clear-cut. 
  One bright Saturday morning my friend Jeff and I set out to drive to a Coast Range clear-cut. It isn't hard to find one. Uncut buffer strips are required between public thoroughfares and the cuts, protecting the public's view by federal mandate. Loggers complain about the trees left unharvested, but those thin, concealing walls of forest may serve the industry well, creating the roadside illusion of intact forest and stifling public objections. We turn down a new logging road, past the gate and warning signs. Here there is no concealing screen between you and the land. We nearly have to turn back. I rationalize my nausea as vertigo from the precipitous roads, the cold sweat as anxiety about oncoming log trucks. But I knew it was fear and the presence of violence around every turn. And grief, grief that rises up from the stumps and soaks into our skin. 
  It's a scene we all want to turn away from, but we had better look at the consequences of what we choose. Jeff and I lace up our hiking boots and start off across the slope. I'm looking hard for signs of remnant mosses, signs of incipient recovery. But all I see is a wasteland of stumps and tattered plants frizzled to a rusty brown in the intense glare of the sun. The luxuriant forest floor has been replaced by windrows of chips. The smell of damp earth is replaced by the fragrance of pitch oozing from cut stumps. It is hard to believe that the same amount of good clean rain falls on a clear-cut as on the adjacent patch of old-growth forest. The land is as dry as sawdust. All that water doesn't do much good without a forest to hold it. Streams draining clear-cut watersheds carry much more water than a stream running through a forest. And without the mossy forest to hold it, the water runs brown with soil, silting up salmon streams as it carries the land to the sea. Rivers give thanks to mosses.
  This raw cut on the land will be replanted with Douglas-fir seedlings, a high-performance monoculture. But trees alone don't make a forest and many organisms have a tough time ever recolonizing the cut-over land. Mosses and lichens, so vital to forest function, disperse very slowly into a recovering forest. Forest scientists have made efforts at finding management practices which will encourage the return of forest biodiversity. Old logs must be left behind to provide habitat for mycorrhizae and salamanders, dead trees for woodpeckers. In a good-faith effort to speed the regrowth of epiphytes, forest policies now dictate that a few old trees must be left standing as refuges for the mosses that will colonize the new forest. It's a hopeful thought, that the coming monoculture of Doug fir will be seeded with mosses spreading from the few trees left behind. But first the remnant mosses, like desert islands in a sea of stumps, must survive the loss of the forest around them. 
  Far down the hillside, I see a lone survivor. A ribbon of striped flagging flutters in the hot wind. It's a marker for the logging crew that this individual was to be left standing to meet the obligation of law and to reseed the forest. I skid down the slope toward it, dodging a tangle of cut limbs. The rains have washed a gully down the hillside. I jump over and dust rises where I land. The survivor stands alone like the last person on earth. There's no joy in being spared the saw when everyone else is gone, riding down the highway to the mills at Roseburg.
  I'd expected a pool of shade beneath the survivor, but its branches are so high up that any shadow is thrown way out among the stumps. Looking up into the canopy I can see that whoever marked this tree had chosen well. It is a prime example of the lush tree-top community that is the signature of an old forest. The trunk and branches are laden with the skeletons of mosses. The sun has bleached away their green and the brown mats are peeling away. Withered carcasses of fern rhizomes are exposed beneath the moss. The wind works at the loose edge of an Antitrichia mat, rustling. We stand there, wordless.
  The poikilohydric nature of mosses allows many species to dry and then recover whenever water is available. But the species here, accustomed to the sweet and steady moisture of the forest, have been pushed beyond their limits of tolerance. Sunbaked and desiccated, they're unlikely to endure until the next forest returns. I'm encouraged that the makers of forest policy gave thought to the mosses and their presence in the future forest. But mosses are intertwined with the fabric of a forest and can't exist alone. If mosses are to take their place in the recovering forest, they must be granted a refuge that will sustain them. If given a voice, I think they would advocate for patches large enough to hold moisture, shady enough to nurture their entire community. What is good for mosses is also good for salamanders, waterbears, and wood thrushes.
?
There is a positive feedback loop created between mosses and humidity. The more mosses there are, the greater the humidity. More humidity leads inexorably to more mosses. The continual exhalation of mosses gives the temperate rain forest much of its essential character, from bird song to banana slugs. Without a saturated atmosphere, small creatures would dry out too quickly, due to their extravagantly high surface area :volume ratio. As the air dries, so do they. So without the mosses, there would be fewer insects and stepwise up the food chain, a deficit of thrushes.
  The insects find shelter in the moss mat, but only rarely are the moss shoots actually eaten. Birds and mammals likewise avoid consuming them, with the exception of some large sporophytes which are high in protein. The almost total lack of herbivory on mosses may be due to the high concentration of phenolic compounds in the leaves, or perhaps their low nutritional value makes it unprofitable to eat them. The toughness of moss cell walls also makes them rather indigestible. Animals that do ingest mosses often pass them out again nearly intact. The indigestible fiber of mosses has been reported from a surprising location-the anal plug of hibernating bears. Apparently, just before entering the winter den, bears may eat a large quantity of moss, which so binds up their digestive system that it blocks defecation through the long winter sleep.
  A whole array of insects spend their larval phases inching their way through moss mats, unseen until the moment of metamorphosis. 
Wiggling out of old skins, they venture out on new wings into the mossmoistened air, free. They feed, they mate, and days later deposit their eggs in a mossy cushion and fly off. To be eaten by a hermit thrush, whose eggs lie cradled in a nest lined with mosses.
  Soft and pliable, mosses are woven into birds' nests of many species, from the velvety cup of a winter wren to the hanging basket of a vireo. They find their greatest use in the bottom of the nest, to cushion the fragile eggs and to provide an insulating layer. I once found a hummingbird nest where trailing mosses decorated the rim of the tiny nest like fluttering Tibetan prayer flags. Birds giving thanks for mosses. They aren't the only ones who rely on mosses for nesting material; flying squirrels, voles, chipmunks, and many others line their burrows with bryophytes. Even bears.
  The marbled murrelet is a coastal bird which feeds on the wealth of marine life along the Pacific shore. For decades, its numbers have been dwindling and it is now listed as an endangered species. The cause of its decline was unknown. Other coastal birds nest along the shore where food is plentiful, forming rookeries on rocky cliffs and seamounts. But murrelets never joined them. Their nesting sites were thought to be hidden since none had ever been seen. In fact, murrelets nest at the tops of old trees, far from their coastal feeding grounds. Every day the birds fly as much as fifty miles inland, to the old-growth forests of the Coast Range. Their disappearance was due primarily to the disappearance of the old growth. Researchers found that most murrelet eggs were laid in a nest made of Antitrichia curtipendula, a luxuriant golden green moss endemic to the Pacific Northwest. This pair, moss and murrelet, are both reliant on the old growth. 
  It seems as if the entire forest is stitched together with threads of moss. Sometimes as a subtle background weave and sometimes with a striking ribbon of color, a brilliant fern green. The ferns which decorate the trunks and branches of the old-growth trees are never rooted in bare bark, always in moss. Ferns give thanks for mosses. Licorice fern runs rhizomes beneath the moss, anchored in the accretion of organic soil. 
  Towering trees and tiny mosses have an enduring relationship that starts at birth. Moss mats often serve as nurseries for infant trees. A pine seed falling to the bare ground might find itself pummeled by heavy raindrops or carried off by a scavenging ant. The emerging rootlet may dry in the sun. But a seed falling on a bed of moss finds itself safely nestled among leafy shoots which can hold water longer than the bare soil and give it a head start on life. The interaction between seed and moss is not universally positive; tree seedlings may be inhibited if the seed is small and the moss is large. But often mosses facilitate the establishment of trees. Mossy logs are often referred to as "nurse logs." The remnants of that nurture can be seen in the straight lines of hemlocks sometimes found in the forest, a legacy of seedlings who shared a beginning on a moist log. Trees give thanks for mosses.
  Moisture begets moss and moss begets slugs. The banana slug must be the unofficial mascot of the Pacific Northwest rain forests, gliding over mossy logs and surprising hikers with six inches of dappled yellow mollusk stretched across a trail. The slugs feed on the many inhabitants of a moss turf, and even on the moss itself. A biologist friend of mine, interested in all things small, once scooped up some slug feces while waiting for a bus and brought them home for a look under the microscope. Sure enough, they were full of tiny moss fragments, and he happily phoned me to report the good news. Slugs eat mosses and disperse them in return. Biologists may make unsuitable dinner conversation, but we are seldom bored.
   Banana slugs are most abundant in the morning, when their slime trails still glisten on the logs. They seem to disappear by the time the dew has dried. But where do they go? I discovered their hideaway one afternoon when I was looking at the flora of decaying logs. Peeling away a layer of Eurhynchium from a massive log, I exposed what seemed to be a whole dormitory of banana slugs. Lying in individual rooms of spongy wood, each was nestled between the cool moist wood and the blanket of moss. I hastily covered them up, before the sun could catch them sleeping. Slugs give thanks to the mosses. 
  The logs of the forest floor shelter more than slugs and bugs, playing an integral role in the nutrient cycle of the ecosystem. The fungi responsible for decay reside there and their survival is highly dependent upon constant moisture in the log. The coating of mosses insulates the log from drying, providing an environment where the fungal mycelium can flourish. The thread-like mycelium is the hidden part of the fungus, the working equipment of decomposition. A wide variety of fungi are found only on deep mats of moss. The beautiful mushrooms are but the tip of the iceberg, the showy reproductive phase which sprouts up from logs like a tiny flower garden. Fungi give thanks to the mosses.
  A specialized class of fungi, essential to forest function, also resides beneath the moss carpet of the soil. On the surface, scraggly turfs of Rhytidiadelphus and mops of Leucolepis cover the forest floor. Beneath them in the humus live the mycorrhizae, a group of fungi which live symbiotically with the roots of trees. The term literally means fungus (myco-) root (-rhizae). The trees host these fungi, feeding them the sugars of photosynthesis. In return, the fungi extend their filamentous mycelium out into the soil to scavenge nutrients for the tree. The vigor of many trees is completely dependent on this congenial relationship. It has recently been discovered that the density of mycorrhizae is significantly higher under a layer of mosses. Bare soil is far less hospitable to this partnership. The association of moss and mycorrhizae may be due to the even moisture and nutrient reservoir beneath the moss carpet. 
  Studying the interactions that happen belowground, among microscopic beings, is notoriously difficult, but a group of researchers has untangled an intricate three-way connection. Tracing the flow of phosphorous through a forest, they followed its footprints in a convoluted path that started with the rain. Throughfall washed phosphorous from the spruce needles onto the mosses below, where it was stored until mycorrhizal fungi insinuated their filaments into the moss turf. Their threadlike hyphae and extracellular enzymes absorbed phosphorous from the dead tissue of mosses. These very same fungi with hyphae in the moss also had hyphae in the roots of the spruce, forming a bridge between moss and tree. This web of reciprocity ensures that phosphorous is endlessly recycled, nothing wasted. 
The patterns of reciprocity 
Frond of Hypnum imponens, by which mosses bind together common on mossy logs a forest community offer us a vision of what could be. They take only the little that they need and give back in abundance. Their presence supports the lives of rivers and clouds, trees, birds, algae, and salamanders, while ours puts them at risk. Human-designed systems are a far cry from this ongoing creation of ecosystem health, taking without giving back. Clear-cuts may meet the short-term desires of one species, but at the sacrifice of the equally legitimate needs of mosses and murrelets, salmon and spruce. I hold tight to the vision that someday soon we will find the courage of selfrestraint, the humility to live like mosses. On that day, when we rise to give thanks to the forest, we may hear the echo in return, the forest giving thanks to the people.
  
The Bystander
?
D
igging my boots into the hill, I gather my strength and lunge for the next handhold, a clump of stems above me. A thorn plunges deep in my thumb, but I 
can't let go. This is my only anchor. The bright blood welling up around it draws my attention to something other than the ache in my legs and the sound of my heart in my ears. Why in the world would they come all the way up here? The tangle of salmonberry is so thick in places that I can't break through. I've had to crawl on my hands and knees to find a route under it. The thorns constantly grab at my hat and my pack and my skin. My clothes are so heavy with mud, every step is an effort. And now I've lost whatever remnant of a trail they left. I feel myself on that knife-edge between laughter and crying. Exhausted, I cast about for some excuse to give up the search and get out of here. Then, out of the corner of my eye I catch sight of red, tattered flagging tied to a branch upslope. That must be the way they came. I'll bet they marked a path for a quick getaway when they were done. My thumb tastes like mud and iron as I suck off the blood and push forward, shielding my face from the brambles with every lunge.
  The higher I go I'm enveloped more and more in the mist that caps these Coast Range hilltops. The gray only adds to the chill and to the growing realization of how far I've come. And that nobody else knows exactly where I am. Not even me. The sound of an agitated pack of hunting dogs from the valley floor makes me realize I'm not alone. My presence is now known. I grimly hope that they don't decide to come investigate this trespasser. That's all I need. I have as much right to be here on public land as they do, but that would hardly matter. Those dogs probably came with them, and lay with their tongues hanging out as they watched.
  At the lip of the hill, it suddenly flattens out into a stand of mistcovered maples. My heart slows down just a fraction and I try to wipe 
The Bystander   
the sweat from my eyes with a muddy hand. The salmonberries thin out and I can see more than few feet ahead of me again. I know instantly that this is the place. So these are the riches that drew them up that insufferable hill. They'd discovered the mother lode. Besides, it's remote enough that they'd never get caught. It's been a while since they were here and the place still shows the hand of violence. 
  Once they finally got here, I guess it must have been easy pickings. It's thick up here where the mist hangs on the hill all day. They must have filled the sacks they brought quicker than they expected, since the stand is only half stripped. They'd never guess there would be so much, and it's heavy to carry.
  The woods across the stream seem to be untouched. The vine maples there are hung with sheets so thick the air itself looks green. There's not a single spot that isn't covered with mosses. I know what I'd see if I looked close. The amazing stuff that only these remote old stands still have-every one an old friend of mine. You don't see these big feathers of Dendroalsia much any more, or the clumps of Antitrichia so thick you could sink your hand into them. Shining ropes of Neckera. And so much more. I wince when I think they probably didn't even stop to look. At least art thieves know what they're taking.
  The other side of the stand has been picked clean; like vultures, they left only the bare bones. I imagine them sticking their dirty hands deep into the mat and ripping it off in swaths the length of their arms. It gives me the shivers to think of that tearing, like a woman stripped naked before her attackers. Peeling back the moss from tree after tree, they cram them all into the burlap bags, light into dark. You've got to acknowledge that they're efficient predators. The exposed bark is utterly naked.
  It bothers me that they sat here and had a self-satisfied cigarette after their work was done. They left the package stuffed into the hollow of a log. I imagine that they whistled to the dogs and headed back down the hill, dragging their hostages behind them. That must have been as bad as coming up the hill, with the salmonberry grabbing at the bags. I can't blame them for not coming back to finish the job. A pickup load's not bad for the day. There's a buyer down at the Pacific Pride station who's paying cash.
The Bystander
  And now my work begins, to catalog the aftermath. I feel like the photographer helplessly documenting a disaster, passive and unable to change the outcome. We find these spots where the moss pickers have been and become scientific witnesses to the destruction. Every scalped branch will be measured and tagged and examined for signs of re-growth. I'm looking hard for hope that these naked branches will have started to green up again. They haven't. Maybe a trailing shoot and here and there a lone branch ventures out onto the hard dry bark. The recovery is almost nonexistent. You don't need a sophisticated analysis to see that, but I dutifully record my data. No one knows how long it will take for them to grow back. Maybe never. Most of these mats were as old as the trees themselves, and got started when they were just saplings.
  The intact part of the stand, though, yields enough measurements to stuff my data book as full as the moss pickers' sacks. Every branch has at least a dozen species of moss, in a dozen different shades of green. Eurhynchium, Claopodium, Homalothecium ... each of them a work of art, a marriage of light and water to produce a carpet more intricate than anything on the planet. An antique tapestry ripped to shreds and stuffed in a bag. And in the bag are also untold billions of beings who made that moss their home, like birds nesting in a forest. Scarlet Orabatid mites, bouncing springtails, whirling rotifers, reclusive waterbears, and their children: shall I say all their names in a requiem mass?
  All this destruction-for what? If we followed the pickup truck down to the city, we could watch them heave their prizes up on the scale at the loading dock and walk away with pockets a little heavier, but not much. At the warehouse, the sacks are dumped out and their contents cleaned and dried. This premium product, "Oregon Green Forest Moss," is marketed all over the world. The marketers trade on the Oregon name to invoke an image of lush forests. Depending on the species and the quality, the mosses are sorted for different products. Low-grade material goes to line flower baskets sold to florists, or to dress up synthetic greenery with what the catalog calls "A Lifelike Look." The most robust and beautiful are saved for a special treatment-the creation of "Designer Moss Sheets." Feathery fronds are glued to a fabric backing and then sprayed with flame retardant so that they will meet fire codes in public places, like beneath the motorcycles at an auto show, and in the most elegant hotel lobbies. The finishing touch is a patented process that applies the trademarked "Moss Life" dye to create a vivid green. This moss "fabric" is rolled up in bolts, ready for sale. Sheets are sold by the yard and the website advertises that it can be used "wherever Mother Nature's touch is wanted."
   I saw them in the main concourse at the Portland airport, filling in the spaces under the plastic trees. I breathed their names when I saw them-Antitrichia, Rhytidiadelphus, Metaneckera-but they turned their eyes away.
?
The rainy forests of the Pacific Northwest create ideal conditions for moss growth. The branches of shrubs and trees are often draped with thick mats of epiphytes, containing many species of mosses, liverworts, and lichens that play important roles in nutrient cycling, food webs, biodiversity, and habitat for invertebrates. The weight of living mosses is estimated at between ten and two hundred kilograms per hectare. In some forests, the weight of mosses may exceed the weight of tree leaves.
  Since , this luxuriant moss growth has come under attack from commercial moss harvesters, who strip branches completely bare and sell the moss to the horticultural industry. Legal moss harvest in the Coast Range of Oregon has been estimated to exceed , kilograms per year. The Forest Service regulates moss harvest on National Forests by a system of permits, but enforcement is minimal. Illegal harvest is thought to be as much as thirty times higher than the legal quota. Additional quantities are taken from other public and private forests. 
  Bryologists have been studying some experimentally harvested plots in order to estimate how quickly the mosses will regrow. Our preliminary studies suggest that recovery may require decades. Four years after harvest, the branches of the vine maple are smooth and bare, with scarcely a trace of moss returning. The mosses left at the torn edges of the stripped branch still cling, but creep out onto the bare area at far less than a snail's pace-a few centimeters in four years. We've discovered that the smooth mature bark is simply too smooth and slippery for mosses to get a foothold. 
The Bystander
  Kent Davis and I began looking at how mosses get started naturally as epiphytes. Surely they must be able to colonize bare bark-otherwise how could these thick moss carpets ever develop? What we found surprised us. Mosses on young trees don't colonize the bare bark at all. When we looked at tiny twigs and young branches, the bark was bare. But on virtually every leaf scar, bud scar, and lenticels there was a tiny tuft of moss. If you look closely at a twig, you'll see that much of it is covered by bark, but it also is textured by its brief history. It is marked by a raised stub where last year's leaf was held. This so-called leaf scar is minutely corky, with just enough texture to capture a spore or two. Twigs also bear a collection of closely spaced ridges which show where the bud used to be. This roughening also seems to provide a foothold for mosses. A young branch starts to collect its moss flora tuft by tiny tuft, leaf scar by leaf scar. We observed that the size of the tufts increased with the age of the branch. As the tree grew older, different mosses would colonize-not on the bare bark, but on top of the initial mosses. The thick moss mats of mature trees got their start on twigs. We found that colonization is much easier on rough young twigs and nearly impossible on old branches. Once the stem has aged and leaf scars become few and far between, the opportunities for attracting mosses have dwindled. We can infer, then, that the mats of mosses which weigh down the branches are probably almost as old as the trees themselves. 
  Moss harvesters are in a sense removing "old-growth" mosses, which cannot replace themselves nearly as quickly as they are removed. This is, by definition, unsustainable harvest. Their loss will have consequences we cannot foresee. When the mosses are taken, their web of interactions goes along with them. Birds, rivers, and salamanders will miss them. 
  This spring I was buying some perennials at my local nursery in upstate New York, a continent away from the mossy forests of Oregon. The displays in the garden shop were enticing as always, sundials and beautiful crockery. As we browsed among them my daughter caught my arm and said ominously "Look." Lined up against the wall was a menagerie of topiary beasts: life-sized reindeer, green teddy bears, and graceful swans. Every one a wire skeleton stuffed with the carcasses of Oregon moss. The time to be a bystander has passed. 
  
Straw into Gold
?
I
t disappeared the year I brought curtains. I knew it was a mistake, yet having made them, owned them, I felt strangely bound to let them hang, although they tangle in the wind and plaster themselves wet against the screen in a thunderstorm. Such is the tyranny of possessions. The window swings inward, a 
big eight=pane square of wavy glass with the glazing weatherbeaten and falling out in chunks. I almost never close it, night or day. Through that window comes the incessant sound of the lake, and the small of white pines, resinous in the sun. Why would a person hang curtains in the wilderness? To shut out starlight on a black, black night? To prevent the looking in by a thousand pinpoint stars?
  Every spring I lock the door on my house full of things, the feathered nest of books and music, soft lights, comfy chairs, and-I blush to admit it-the three computers and a dishwasher. I drive away from the carefully tended gardens, with delphiniums just coming in to bloom, taking with me as little as possible. As I drive northward, on my annual migration from the rolling farmlands of upstate New York to the unbroken forest of the Adirondacks, the comfortable life of the professor's house slips father and father away.
  The Biological Station is an outpost on the far eastern shore of Cranberry Lake. It is accessible only by a seven-mile boat trip across the open lake. In early June, the crossing can be a rough one. After all, the water was ice only six short weeks ago. The rain and the waves join forces and sheet from my raincoat sleeves. I turn to look at the girls, huddled in the stern with their heads tucked in their ponchos like red and blue turtles. The wind nearly blows my glasses off my face, and I'm blinded in the rain, trying to keep the boat abreast of the waves. One slap of the bow against a roller and we are drenched. The icy water finds its way into the small unzipped gap at my throat and trickles 
   Straw Into Gold
down between my breasts. All we have is in this boat. All we need lies on the shore ahead.
  We arrive at the dock as the skies deepen to darkness and walk up through the dripping woods to the unlit cabin, just visible in the steely gray reflection from the lake. We peel off our wet clothes in the dark and I fumble to find the coffee can of matches The kids stand close behind me, in blankets, as I kneel at the fireplace. Their wet socks leave footprints on the floor. The first sulfur flare of the match seems to light up the whole room, first blue and then golden as it catches the birch bark. For me, the incense of yellow birch bark has always been the scent of safety. I breathe a sigh of relief and the tension rolls off my tired shoulders like the rain from the roof. On this far shore, on this rainy night with the firelight dancing on the bare walls, I am more content than in my warm house full of lovely things. Here is every single thing I need. And it is precious little: rain on the outside, fire on the inside. And soup. And the rest is luxury. Especially curtains.
  Every summer I brought less and less. When they were little, the girls could each bring just one toy and a rainy-day box full of crayons, paper, and such. But they usually went back home unused. A whole summer was not nearly long enough for all the rocks there were to climb and forts to build. The crayons languished while little villages of pebbles and pine cones spread out under the pines. They tied blue jay feathers in their pigtails and ate up the summer in heaping spoonfuls like homemade peach ice cream. After supper I'd set aside my moss work and we'd go scrambling along the lake edge. Late in the long day, the low hanging sun across the lake would bathe our shore in light as thick and gold as honey. We'd clamber over rocks and get our feet wet, dodging the waves. The girls would intently examine bits of driftwood and pearly mussel shells, their faces luminous in the sunset, shining gold. This is when we saw it, that most improbable of beings.
  The fires that burned here at the turn of the twentieth century gave us a lakeside border of paper birches, brilliant white and rooted in the glacial sands. The last glacier gave us a lakeshore of granite boulders. The jumble of rocks make solitary spots for watching the sunset and create a strong barrier to the action of wind and waves. But there are breaches among the rocks where the waves have ridden in on a storm, undermining the sandy shore and excavating small caves. We poke our heads into the caves, brushing away the sticky spider webs that stretch over the entrances. The caves are small enough for kids to crouch inside, but grownups are barred. We can only look. I lie on the lake-washed cobbles, my head in the cave, looking up into the dimness. It smells cool and moist like the dirt floor of an old cellar. The sounds of the waves are muffled inside, my daughters' excited breathing seems loud in the dark quiet.
  The roof of the cave is a dark dome, sand laced together with a network of birch roots. The back of the cave disappears upward into shadow. What light there is moves eerily, reflections from the water outside wavering up and down the cave walls. And then, out of the corner of my eye, something glitters. Something green. Something fleeting, like the eye of a bobcat in the firelight.
  I stretch out my fingertip toward the green shimmer and pull it away when all I feel is dampness, like a film of cold sweat. I half expect my finger to glow like the time I accidentally squashed a firefly in the screwtop of a Mason jar on a summer night. But there's nothing. The soil surface itself seems to give off light. As I turn my head, the light comes and goes, glittering like the iridescence on a hummingbird's throat, one moment sparkling, the next moment black.
  Schistostega pennata, the Goblins' Gold, is unlike any other moss. It is a paragon of minimalism, simple in means, rich in ends. So simple you might not recognize it as a moss at all. The more typical mosses on the bank outside spread themselves out to meet the sun. Such robust leaves and shoots, though tiny, require a substantial amount of solar energy to build and maintain. They are costly in the solar currency. Some mosses need full sun to survive, others favor the diffuse light of clouds, while Schistostega lives on the clouds' silver lining alone. Inside the shoreline caves light is reduced to mere watery reflections from the lake surface. 
Filamentous protomena of 	It is only one-tenth of one percent of the Schistostega pennata	light outside.
  Sunlight in caves is much too scarce for Schistostega to afford much in the way of architecture. Leaves are a bit of a luxury in so spare an environment. So, in place of leaves and shoots, Goblins' Gold is reduced to a fragile mat of translucent green filaments, the protonema. The shimming presence of Schistostega is created entirely by the weft of nearly invisible threads crisscrossing the surface of the moist soil. It glows in the dark, or rather it glitters in the half light of places which scarcely feel the sun.
  Each filament is a strand of individual cells strung together like beads shimmering on a string. The walls of each cell are angled, forming interior facets like a cut diamond. It is these facets which cause Schistostega to sparkle like the tiny lights of a far-away city. These beautifully angled walls capture traces of light and focus it inward, where a single large chloroplast awaits the gathering beam of light. Packed with chlorophyll ad membranes of exquisite complexity, the chloroplast converts the light energy into a stream of flowing electrons. This is the electricity of photosynthesis, turning sun into sugar, spinning straw into gold.
  Here on the shadowy edge of where green life seems barely possible, Schistostega has all it needs. Rain on the outside, fire on the inside. I feel a kinship with this being whose cold light is so different from my own. It asks very little from the world and yet glitters in response. I have been blessed by the companionship of good teachers and I count Schistostega among them.
  My small daughter blows at the roots dangling in front of her face. She looks like a goblin herself,  crouched in the darkness, guarding the gold. Outside, the sun drops lower. A wide ribbon of orange light unrolls over the lake toward us. The sun is just a degree or two above the horizon now, its rim barely touching the hills on the opposite shore, sinking. The time is almost here. We're both holding our breat as the light starts to climb the walls of the cave. At last the sun drops low enough to reach the opening in the bank. Suddenly the sun pierces the darkness like a shaft of light through a slit in an Incan temple on the dawn of the summer solstice. Timing is everything. Just for a moment, in the pause before the earth rotates us again into night, the cave is flooded with light. The near-nothingness of Schistostega erupts in a shower of sparkles, like green glitter spilled on the rug at Christmas. Each cell of the protonema refracts the light, transforming it to the sugar that will sustain it through the coming darkness. And then, within minutes, it's gone. All its needs are net in an ephemeral moment at the end of the day when the sun aligns with the mouth of the cave. We climb back up to the top of the bank and walk back to the cabin as the sunset fades to dark.
  On those most opportune of summer evenings light is plentiful. Schistostega responds by making more of itself to intercept the summer light. All along the protonema, tiny buds have been poised to take advantage of this transitory abundance. The buds expand to form ranks of upright shoots, scattered over the protonema. Each shoot is shaped like a feather, flat and delicate. The soft blue green fronds stand up like a glad of translucent ferns, tracking the path of the sun. It is so little. And yet it is enough.
  The knowledge of this patch of moss was a gift to me and I share it judiciously. My old professor showed it to me before he retired, after he knew my fate was sealed as a bryologist. I wouldn't show it to just anyone. I'm afraid I was rather haughty about this knowledge, doling it out only to those who'd proven themselves sufficiently appreciative to be worthy of the gift. It's not that I'm afraid that they might value it so highly they would take it. Rather, I'm afraid that they might not value it enough. So I hoarded that gold, protecting it, I thought, from disrespect from someone for whom its tiny glitter was not enough.
  The patient gleaming of light eventually earns Schistostega enough energy to support a family. In the moisture condensed on the walls of the cave, the sperm swim blindly until reaching the receptive female, and a sporophyte is born. The tiny little capsule arises from the base of a filmy frond, and casts its spores upon the breeze. I suspect that the offspring don't usually escape the breathless confines of the cave, and yet there are colonies of Schistostega scattered all along the shore Somehow they find their way to other pockets of this accidental habitat. It's a good thing, because caves don't live forever.
  My girls got older and had better things to do than wander along the shoreline at sunset. And without them, I visited the caves less and less often. I got busy with other things, like hanging curtains. That was the year the glowing moss disappeared. One evening, walking alone, I saw that the bank where it lived had slumped, collapsing under its own 

Schistostega pennata, the Goblins' Gold
weight and closing off the mouth of the cave. I suppose it was just the inevitable consequence of time and erosion. But I wonder.
  An Onondaga elder once explained to me that plants come to us when they are needed. If we show them respect by using them and appreciating their gifts they will grow stronger. They will stay with us as long as they are respected. But if we forget about them, they will leave.
  The curtains were a mistake. As if the sun and the stars and a moss that glitters were not enough to make it a home. Their superfluous flapping was a lapse in respect, a slap in the face to the light and the air waiting outside my window. Instead I invited in the small tyranny of things and let it make me forgetful. Forgetful that all I need is already here, rain on the outside, fire on the inside. Schistostega would not have made the same mistake. Too late, after the caves had collapsed. I threw the curtains into the woodstove and sent them up the chimney to the glittering stars.
  Later that night, when the fire has died to embers and the moonlight is pouring in my window, I wonder about Schistostega. Can reflected moonlight set it to sparkling too? How many days a year can it rely o the sun to align with its window on the lake? Can it live on the opposite shore where it waits for the light of sunrise? Perhaps it's only here on our shore where the winds cut out caves and the sun can make a direct path between the rocks. The combination of circumstances which allows it to exist at all are so implausible that Schistostega is rendered much more precious than gold. Goblins' or otherwise. Not only does its presence depend on the coincidence of the cave's angle to the sun, but if the hills on the western shore were any higher the sun would set before reaching the cave. But for that small fact there would be no glitter. And only by virtue of the westerly winds steadily beating against the shore are there caves for Schistostega at all. Its life and ours exist only because of a myriad of synchronicities that bring us to this particular place at this particular moment. In return for such a gift, the only sane response is to glitter in reply.
  