1
 Following this train of thought, ecological activists such as Rupert Read  argue against
using the term ‘environment’, contending it reinforces dualistic ontologies that situate humans
outside of ecological contexts. Read suggests the terms ‘ecology’ or ‘ecosystem’ are always
preferable due to their inherent connectivity. This proves problematic though, as removing
the term environment loses a useful descriptor for distinguishing between primarily social
issues such as labour rights or access to health care, and issues such as loss of biodiversity
or ocean acidification which are at least equally focused upon nonhumans. While both scales
involve entanglements of human and nonhuman actors, the balance of those relations is quite
different. Consequently, despite the tendency towards dualism associated with the term, I will
use environmental ecology and environmental justice as descriptors referring to conflicts that
foreground nonhumans.



eliding the assumed oppositions between socially constructed human culture
and the nonhuman domains of nature and technology.
   Ecology emphasizes process, flow, dynamism and complexity. As Matthew
Fuller  .argues, the term ecology is ‘one of the most expressive
language currently has to indicate the massive and dynamic interrelation
of processes and objects, beings and things, patterns and matter’. This is
one of the two entangled connotations of the term which is central to the
media ecology of this book, with the second being the sense of ecological
crisis that is associated with climate change and the Anthropocene. While
thinking about media and ecology often foregrounds dynamism and
complexity, my argument here is that media ecology must also articulate
how digital media are deeply politically, materially and culturally implicated
in the production of contemporary ecological crises and are necessary
components of collective mobilizations designed to substantively address
them. My approach to media ecology therefore requires the formation of
an ecopolitics that employs technologies to mobilize actions and produce
structures characterized by equity, commons and mutualism, rather than
the neoliberal logic of competitive individualism that largely dominates
contemporary technology, culture and society.
   Alongside ecology, a second key term for this book is ‘entanglement’.
My usage of this term derives from the works of the feminist philosopher
of science Karen Barad and social anthropologist Tim Ingold, for whom
the term refuses subject/object, nature/culture and representation/reality
dualisms. Instead, entanglement posits a world of becoming which is not
composed of isolatable, interconnected individuals, but of entities that are
bound in continuous, evolutionary and non-teleological transformations of
one another: ‘To be entangled is not simply to be intertwined with another, as
in the joining of separate entities, but to lack an independent, self-contained
existence. Existence is not an individual affair. Individuals do not pre-exist
their interactions’ (Barad  x). Entanglement presents a novel way of
approaching the world in which the atomized individual components which
are normatively conceived of as nodes within networks, or organisms within
environments, are instead considered as meshworks of knotted lines which
collectively compose ecological systems. As Ingold  1) emphasizes:

    Beings do not simply occupy the world, they inhabit it, and in so doing
    – in threading their own paths through the meshwork – they contribute
    to its ever-evolving weave. Thus we must cease regarding the world as
    an inert substratum, over which living things propel themselves about
    like counters on a board or actors on a stage, where artefacts and the
    landscape take the place, respectively, of properties and scenery.

As a social anthropologist, Ingold is primarily interested in exploring
entanglement, movement and growth in living systems, whereas this book
  


is primarily concerned with ecologies of contemporary digital media. Such
systems always include human and technological elements, and following
the philosopher of technology Bernard Stiegler, this book will approach
technological systems as being fundamentally constitutive of what it means
to be human.
   While humans design, alter, hack, modify and otherwise condition
the state of technological evolution, those technological developments
simultaneously alter the plastic structures of the human brain through
what Stiegler terms ‘epiphylogenesis’, a mode of evolutionary change
which occurs outside of genetics and is dependent upon the distributed
cognitive apparatus of technology. Epiphylogenetic activity can be traced
to the earliest human interactions with tools and the formation of what we
understand to be culture. Thus understood, culture is always and has always
been entangled with nonhuman technological systems. Consequently, this
book uses the term ‘technoculture’ as shorthand which seeks to inscribe
the nonhuman agencies of technology into the domain of culture, drawing
attention towards the way that tropes such as culture and society, which
are often presumed to relate to humans always involve entanglements of
humans, other living beings and technologies.


            Digital ecosystems and platforms
The terms ‘media ecology’ and ‘media ecologies’ are currently used in
multiple ways in differing areas of media scholarship. Perhaps the most
common application of the term ‘ecology’ to digital media refers to analysis
that recognizes the commonality between digital technocultural systems and
ecosystems insofar as both are dynamic, negentropic systems maintained
at a point of balanced disequilibrium by flows of energy and matter, and
which consequently exhibit non-teleological, complex behaviours. Whereas
a savannah or jungle requires flows of sunlight, heat and water for its
inhabitants to collectively constitute those systems, digital ecosystems require
electrons, (human and nonhuman) attention and a plethora of materials for
infrastructural production and maintenance.
   Frequently, we hear of the Apple and Google mobile ecosystems,
demarcating the ways that these two corporations have built integrated
systems of hardware, such as the iPhone, iPad, iMac, Apple Watch, iCloud
storage (and the Google/Android equivalents), software, such as the iOS
operating system, iTunes, the Apple App Store, Safari web browser and
content creation and sharing tools such as Final Cut Pro, iMovie, Aperture,
Photos, Garageband and Logic Pro. The key to understanding the success
of the iOS/Android systems is based not upon any particular part of this
ecosystem, but upon the way that all of the constituent elements relate
to one another and, critically, how they allow third parties to contribute



to this ecosystem, for example by populating the App Store. Similarly,
Facebook and Twitter are examples of software platforms which are often
referred to as providing an ecosystem due to the manner by which they
provide publicly available Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) with
which third-party software developers can develop various forms of software
which interface with the core platform. Examples include social games such
as Farmville and Mafia Wars, customized interfaces such as TweetDeck, and
the Facebook Connect API, which allows third-party website users to log in
using their Facebook account and to ‘Like’ pages, which provides Facebook
with valuable data which would otherwise be outside of its domain (Morin
 ).
    One of the key points this raises is that value is not predominantly
generated by Facebook itself, but through the productive activity of both
partner sites and users, which is understood as one of the hallmarks of an
effective platform as ecosystem (Bodle . Whereas in the mass media
age value was primarily derived from creating mediated content, building
a digital ecosystem means constructing a participatory community, which
from a commercial perspective amounts to monetizing the activity of
what was previously the audience or customer in addition to third-party
developers. While understandings of media audiences as commodities, as
eyeballs being sold to advertisers has long been one way of grasping the
political economy of media (Smythe . the degree of generative activity,
in terms of creating content, communities, networked social relations and the
data-driven modes of user surveillance and statistical behavioural prediction
(Amoore .has been substantively altered by networked digital media.
    One prominent ecologically inflected trope we find employed alongside
that of the technological ecosystem is that of the walled garden, a way of
denoting concern surrounding how closed-source informational ecosystems
erect boundaries around how hardware and software may be used. This
produces a situation where it can be extremely difficult for alternative
platforms to gain a critical mass of users and apps, and has been particularly
prominent in the areas of mobile computation and social media. Whereas
the web was designed with open protocols, enabling access which did not
discriminate based upon the type of hardware being used, iOS and Android
apps only work on those specific platforms and buying software on one
platform does not entail continuing access if users subsequently change
platform. Consequently, consumers find themselves being placed behind
barriers which inhibit movement but are exceptionally successful in keeping
users ‘loyal’ to corporate ecosystems.
    Historically, the horticultural variety of walled garden was not designed to
keep intruding humans or animals out, but to create spaces that were warmer
than their surroundings, affording walled gardens in temperate climates,
such as in England and Ireland the ability to grow grapes, peaches and other
plants which normally require a Mediterranean climate. The enclosing walls
  


of brick or stone would shelter plants from wind and absorb heat from
sunlight during the day, which would slowly radiate out overnight, creating
a warmer microclimate (Campbell . The analogy of creating enclosed
digital spaces as a means of protecting fragile users from nefarious hackers,
pornographic content and other online hazards is undoubtedly one which
platform providers would identify with, but in practice walled gardens have
been criticized for locking customers in to technological systems (Netanel
   and allowing corporate entities to function as gatekeepers who are
free to censor, ban and otherwise foreclose material which challenges their
worldview (Gillula .
   While such accounts of digital ecosystems and walled gardens employ
ecological and horticultural tropes as a metaphor, they often remain
somewhat adrift from engagements with the materiality which underpins
digital technocultural forms. Consequently, the notion that there is a separate,
digital space which exists alongside the meatspace of embodied interactions
is promulgated, which follows the tradition of approaching networked
media through a series of old/new, analogue/digital, passive/(inter)active and
present/absent binary oppositions. The ecological framework proposed by
Paul Virilio exemplifies this dualistic logic, arguing that alongside the green
ecology of ‘nature’, we find a ‘grey ecology’ of industrial culture. While
Virilio’s exposition of ‘dromocracy’, the speeds borne from contemporary
industrial technoculture is useful in grasping aspects of the contemporary
technocultural context, striating ecology into green and grey ecosystems
effectively reinstitutes the nature/culture dualism that ecology undermines.
   The dualistic model of green and grey ecologies resembles another
deployment of the term media ecology, which is associated with the works
of Marshall McLuhan and Neil Postman. This version of media ecology is
primarily concerned with human engagements with the symbolic or cultural
environment of media, and the moral ramifications of these interactions.
While there is overlap with this book vis-à-vis concerns pertaining to effects
of technologies on social structures and a focus on the pace, scale and
patterns associated with particular technological ensembles, this approach
to media ecology diverges sharply from this text insofar as it is concerned
with making:

  People more conscious of the fact that human beings live in two different
  kinds of environments. One is the natural environment and consists
  of things like air, trees, rivers, and caterpillars. The other is the media
  environment, which consists of language, numbers, images, holograms,
  and all of the other symbols, techniques, and machinery that make us
  what we are. (Postman  1)

Whereas ecology is used here to elide binary oppositions between nature
and culture, instead highlighting the flows of energy and matter throughout



a series of entangled scalar ecosystems, the approach favoured by Postman
and McLuhan reinforces dualisms through the study of a symbolic or cultural
environment which is posited as distinct from its natural counterpart.
Consequently, McLuhan and Postman’s version of media ecology does not
address the materiality of media networks: the environmental and labour
issues that are associated with the extraction, manufacturing, energy,
transportation and waste industries that are absolutely fundamental to the
production of the material infrastructures that are necessary for there to be
digital media, as these issues do not fall within the ‘media environment’ that
Postman articulates as existing alongside the natural environment.
   The conceptual divergence between the McLuhan/Postman tradition
of media ecology and that employed here and within recent materialist
appropriations of the term (Fuller  Parikka , , .derives
from the onto-epistemological frameworks within which the respective
modes operate. Postman’s version of media ecology ‘emphasises a humanistic
approach to understanding media, communication, and technology’
(Grossweiler . Humanism, the dominant philosophical tradition within
Western culture, emphasizes humanity’s separation from nature, casting
humans as rational animals which uniquely possess free will, differentiating
them from the determinate automatons which comprise other living and
nonliving systems. Consequently, Postman has been criticized for proposing
a form of media ecology which is based on a dualistic ontology (Stephens
 ). Eco-materialist thought opposes this dualistic onto-epistemology,
instead following thinkers such as Gilles Deleuze, Felix Guattari, Gregory
Bateson and Donna Haraway in positing humans as one species entangled
with others. While humans may form particularly dense knots of entanglement
within ecosystems, they are not ontologically distinct entities.


                   Anthropocenic ecologies
I have two primary motivations for exploring digital media through the
lens of ecology; firstly, I am interested in the potential utility of analysing
media as dynamic adaptive ecosystems, and secondly, I want to explore
the political implications of adopting this approach. Ecology as a way of
studying interconnection and interaction in complex dynamical systems
seems apt as a method of exploring rapidly evolving contemporary systems
of digital media production, distribution and consumption, especially
when media is increasingly collaboratively created, consumed, shared and
remixed. While formal homologies between complex, dynamical systems
and digital media have long been explored by texts such as Kevin Kelly’s
Out of Control , this book differentiates itself from this tradition
through a sustained engagement with an ecologically informed politics, that
profoundly diverges from formal homologies between ecology and digital
technologies that are pursued within the context of what Kelly describes as
  


the benevolent corporate super-organism of neoliberal capitalism. Indeed,
we frequently find the language of ecology applied to technocultural and
business-led systems as a way of naturalizing these constructed entities, a
discursive sleight of hand which designates them as ideologically neutral,
‘natural’ processes rather than politically contestable strategies.
   Rather than exploring ecological metaphors and digital media, or ways
that ecology might provide productive insights for increased efficiency
and systemic exploitation, this text considers what the application of an
ecosophical ethic and politics to digital media may involve. My argument
here is that an ecological approach may prove productive in reconsidering
particular dimensions of mediated practices with regard to social and
environmental justice in the Anthropocene,2 a geological epoch where
human activities are said to play a defining role in altering the planet’s climate
and biodiversity in ways that will be quantifiably detectable in the planet’s
geological strata. Key markers of this new epoch include anthropogenic
climate change, alterations to the planetary nitrogen and phosphorus cycles,
the production of vast quantities of biologically persistent ‘technofossils’
such as plastic and a massive reduction in biodiversity with the current
species extinction rate only equalled within the handful of terrestrial
mass-extinction events that have occurred in the past two billion years.
Reorienting technocultural systems to avoid the dystopian future forecast by
the Anthropocene – an Earth with dramatically reduced numbers of human
beings and other species of life collectively struggling under an inhospitable
climate – therefore becomes an urgent task for contemporary ecopolitics.
   Terming the contemporary geological epoch the Anthropocene should,
however, raise several conceptual questions. Does the foregrounding
Anthropos – humanity (or more accurately, and problematically, man) –
restate the misplaced emphasis on humans as autonomous agents
who mobilize an inert and passive nature that has been substantively
problematized by posthuman and new materialist discourses on agency
(Bennett  Haraway . Does the Anthropocene problematically
posit a homogenized humanity, thereby forming a depoliticized technocratic
discourse that neglects the roles of privileged elites and capitalist systems
of overproduction and hyper-consumption in contemporary ecological
crises (Moore  Malm  Boneuil and Fressoz . Does the
Anthropocene mark the re-emergence of the overly-simplistic, universalist
meta-narratives that were supposedly consigned to the dustbin of history
by postmodernism, albeit with the positive Enlightenment metanarrative
of progress replaced with the negative discourse of anthropogenic ecocide
(Taffel a)?


2
 In , a working group established by the International Commission of Stratigraphy
formally recommend that the Anthropocene be adopted as the geological epoch following the
Holocene, for more details see Taffel a.



   While these questions highlight serious shortcomings with Anthropocenic
discourse and terminology, its utility rests upon its potential to galvanize
political actions to escape a future where humanity plays a major role in
destabilizing the global climate and precipitating an enormous reduction
in planetary biodiversity, alongside how the term re-connects human
(technocultural) history with geological (natural) histories. The eco-
ethical imperative then is to formulate technocultural systems designed
to mitigate the current direction of the Anthropocene; an unprecedented
speed of ecological alteration, within which assemblages of (certain groups
of) humans, nonhuman life forms (such as cattle and corn) and nonhuman
technical entities (such as computers and coal-burning power stations) are
collectively imposing an acceleration of changes upon ecosystems which
contain entities who lack the adaptive capacity to evolve at such speeds.
Notwithstanding the widespread fantasies of technological salvation via
geoengineering, nuclear fusion or carbon capture and storage, any species
which quarrels with its own ecology is one which likely destroys its own
future.
   Ecology cuts across the traditional dualisms of nature and culture,
human and nonhuman, living and nonliving systems presenting a method
of tracing connections through entangled technocultural phenomena which
have frequently been approached as distinct, divided and even oppositional.
A pertinent example is the historical division between Marxist social
justice advocates and their environmental justice counterparts, whereby
Marxists criticized environmentalism as ‘a defensive movement in which the
middle classes and capitalist entrepreneurs are attempting to protect their
interests, which are increasingly threatened by the internal contradictions
of capitalism’ (Pepper  73). While such accounts do not dispute the
reality of environmental degradation, they contend that such phenomena
were not novel developments; the environmental ramifications of the coal
pits and factories that fuelled the industrial revolution had always caused
immiseration and detrimental health impacts to humans,3 but this suffering
was borne primarily by the working classes: ‘The ecological movement has



3
 Nonhuman concerns having been largely absent from the majority of Marxist–humanist
accounts. It is, however, important to note that according to Marx  05–6): ‘Capitalist
production … disturbs the metabolic interaction between man and the earth, i.e. prevents the
return to the soil of its constituent elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing;
it therefore violates the conditions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil … all progress in
capitalist agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing
the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time is a progress towards
ruining the more long-lasting sources of that fertility. … Capitalist production, therefore,
develops technology… only by sapping the original sources of all wealth – the soil and the
worker.’ This focus upon ecology and metabolic rifts within Marx’s writings has become
central to contemporary eco-Marxism (Bellamy-Foster  Moore .
  


only come into being since the districts which the bourgeoisie inhabit and
their living conditions have been exposed to those environmental burdens
that industrialization brings with it’ (Enzensberger  0).
   Whereas Enzensberger contends that environmental protests are
merely manifestations of the bourgeoisie feeling the effects of the internal
contradictions of capitalism, the adverse effects of Anthropocenic ecological
crises will be primarily borne by people lacking the economic capacity for
adaptation, or who are directly reliant on local environmental resources
for their income. In other words, while there are geographically disparate
effects expected to arise from ecological crises such as climate change, they
tend to affect social groups proportionally to their economic status, with
the poorest groups, whose labour is often directly tied to the land or oceans,
and who lack the economic capacity for adaptive measures, hit the hardest.
Consequently, within the globalized context of the Anthropocene, social
justice issues cannot be understood as distinct from environmental justice
issues.
   This entanglement of the domains previously understood as nature
and culture, humanity and technology, or (human) history and (natural)
geology, calls for an ecological ethic and political mobilization addressing
the dire predictions of a planetary mass-extinction event predicated
by industrial anthropogenic activity, while also questioning the
anthropocentrism present in such claims. There currently exist several
ecological ethics which contrast with conservationist approaches that
seek the preservation of romanticized notions of a pre-industrial or pre-
colonial nature and thereby depart from ecological approaches that are
concerned with complex dynamical systems. Two prominent positions here
are social and deep ecology. Social ecology maintains an anthropocentric
perspective, centring on human societies and understanding ‘nature’ as a
series of resources to be utilized for human benefit, while contending that
the concept of humans dominating nature arises from the social context of
humans dominating other humans. Murray Bookchin  1) surmises
the ethical approach espoused by social ecology as an ecology of freedom,
which expresses ‘the reconciliation of nature and human society in a new
ecological sensibility and a new ecological society – a re-harmonization
of nature and humanity through a re-harmonization of human with
human’. While social ecology goes beyond current understandings of value
as primarily derived from economic wealth, critics such as Arne Naess
 , .and Jonathan Porritt  argue that it maintains that
nonhuman life is valued primarily in terms of utility to human societies
and that while this exceeds economic usage, encompassing aesthetic and
spiritual dimensions, the anthropocentric focus on ‘natural resources’
requires challenging.
   The deep ecology perspective instead contends that nonhumans have
intrinsic value: ‘the value of nonhuman life is independent of the usefulness
1


these may have for narrow human purposes’ (Naess  9). It proposes
a biocentric ethic whereby humans are accorded no special ontological
status and are compelled to act in a manner which will not reduce biological
diversity, regardless of the impacts upon human society. Indeed, one of
Naess’s principles of deep ecology contends that for human and nonhuman
life to flourish a substantial decrease in the human population is required,
from a current global population of over seven billion to less than a
hundred million. While Naess posits no methods to achieve this gargantuan
population reduction, this argument has been criticized as misanthropic,
neo-imperialist and racist (Bookchin  Hardt and Negri  65–7),
as a privileged, white, European man calls for a massive reduction in the
global population.
    While questions of population are politically difficult, they must
be understood in relation to what sort of existence is being posited. A
future society which expects to use coal, shale oil and tar sands to power
intercontinental travel, digital technologies and industrialized animal
agriculture could sustainably support a miniscule population when
compared to one using local renewable energy sources, eating a plant-
based diet and rarely travelling by air (at least if using contemporary
forms of fossil-fuel-based transportation). Indeed, while the controversial
but influential IPAT equation (Impact = Population x Affluence x
Technology) used to model human impacts upon ecological systems
has been widely criticized for including technology as an unquantifiable
weighting variable alongside population and affluence (which is measured
by GDP per capita), it does at least foreground that the ecological impact
of human populations can only be understood in combination with their
technologies. We must, however, bear in mind that the richest per cent
of the global population is responsible for half of anthropogenic carbon
dioxide emissions (Oxfam  . Consequently, we see that it is vital
to consider questions of social inequality and the differential ecological
impacts of different ways of living into any discussion of optimal or
sustainable global populations – a dimension which is entirely absent
from IPAT – rather than homogenizing humanity into a singular force
whose ecological impacts can be understood through the number of living
individuals.4
    While infinite population growth on a finite planet is clearly unsustainable,
there are two major concerns with the discourse of overpopulation. First,
the reductive disavowal of difference and inequality which provides a
homogenized humanity and, secondly, the fact that this argument propagates


4
 This has also been a major critique of the Anthropocene, which in some cases argues that an
undifferentiated humanity is the cause of contemporary ecological crises (see Moore 
Bonneuil and Fressoz .
  


an apathetic stance whereby political urgency is disarmed by a sense that
ecological problems are ultimately a result of there being too many people
on the planet, rather than phenomena which can be addressed through
collective actions aimed at curtailing the obscene levels of consumption
associated with a relatively small percentage of humans and redistributing
wealth more equitably. Furthermore, the pragmatic strategies that have
historically proven successful at curbing population growth – decreasing
child mortality rates, providing higher levels of education for women and
access to contraceptives – are all socially desirable. Focusing upon improving
lives by implementing these three things is likely to curb population growth
without an explicit focus on reducing populations.
    Rather than adopting either social or deep ecological positions, my
approach to media ecology implements an ecological ethic based on the
positions of Gilles Deleuze, Felix Guattari and Gregory Bateson which
cut across a social/deep ecology dualism, positing a form of perspectivism
that argues for multiple ecologics, not a single ecology (Chisholm 
Herzogenrath . This approach questions the notions of harmony and
stability common to social and deep ecological constructions of nature,
instead positing a multitude of ecosystems which exist balanced at points
far from equilibrium. This approach questions the usefulness of adopting
a single standpoint which purports to centre upon either humanity or all
life, instead drawing upon Guattari and Deleuze’s logic of the AND, a
methodological pluralism which emphasizes pragmatic embodied praxis
over abstract universals and either/or binary choices. This logic advances
through assembling, bringing together disparate elements to build coalitions
capable of producing systemic change that escape the individualist and
commodified tendencies that currently dominate digital cultures.



              Scale and digital technoculture
One of the key concepts which media ecology mobilizes to address this
logic of the AND is scale. Thinking in terms of entangled scalar ecologies
allows us to move between phenomena encompassing the micro-temporal
and micro-spatial registers of voltages, photons and algorithms, through to
the global infrastructures of international standards organizations, undersea
cables, satellites, server farms, cellular towers and social media platforms.
Indeed, as Jussi Parikka  b:  has recently stated, ‘to be interested
in the multiple scales on which reality is built, co-constructed, is not a
luxury, but a necessity for critical theory nowadays’. The concept of scale
is applied in varying ways across a broad spectrum of academic disciplines,
and outlining these debates surrounding scale is useful in clarifying how the
term is deployed here.
1
