 My argument here is that an ecological approach may prove productive in reconsidering particular dimensions of mediated practices with regard to social and environmental justice in the Anthropocene,2 a geological epoch where human activities are said to play a defining role in altering the planet's climate and biodiversity in ways that will be quantifiably detectable in the planet's geological strata. Key markers of this new epoch include anthropogenic climate change, alterations to the planetary nitrogen and phosphorus cycles, the production of vast quantities of biologically persistent ‘technofossils' such as plastic and a massive reduction in biodiversity with the current species extinction rate only equalled within the handful of terrestrial mass-extinction events that have occurred in the past two billion years. Reorienting technocultural systems to avoid the dystopian future forecast by the Anthropocene – an Earth with dramatically reduced numbers of human beings and other species of life collectively struggling under an inhospitable climate – therefore becomes an urgent task for contemporary ecopolitics. Terming the contemporary geological epoch the Anthropocene should, however, raise several conceptual questions. Does the foregrounding Anthropos – humanity (or more accurately, and problematically, man) – restate the misplaced emphasis on humans as autonomous agents who mobilize an inert and passive nature that has been substantively problematized by posthuman and new materialist discourses on agency Bennett Haraway . Does the Anthropocene problematically posit a homogenized humanity, thereby forming a depoliticized technocratic discourse that neglects the roles of privileged elites and capitalist systems of overproduction and hyper-consumption in contemporary ecological crises (Moore Malm Boneuil and Fressoz . Does the Anthropocene mark the re-emergence of the overly-simplistic, universalist meta-narratives that were supposedly consigned to the dustbin of history by postmodernism, albeit with the positive Enlightenment metanarrative of progress replaced with the negative discourse of anthropogenic ecocide (Taffel a)? 2 In , a working group established by the International Commission of Stratigraphy formally recommend that the Anthropocene be adopted as the geological epoch following the Holocene, for more details see Taffel a. While these questions highlight serious shortcomings with Anthropocenic discourse and terminology, its utility rests upon its potential to galvanize political actions to escape a future where humanity plays a major role in destabilizing the global climate and precipitating an enormous reduction in planetary biodiversity, alongside how the term re-connects human (technocultural) history with geological (natural) histories. The eco- ethical imperative then is to formulate technocultural systems designed to mitigate the current direction of the Anthropocene; an unprecedented speed of ecological alteration, within which assemblages of (certain groups of) humans, nonhuman life forms (such as cattle and corn) and nonhuman technical entities (such as computers and coal-burning power stations) are collectively imposing an acceleration of changes upon ecosystems which contain entities who lack the adaptive capacity to evolve at such speeds. Notwithstanding the widespread fantasies of technological salvation via geoengineering, nuclear fusion or carbon capture and storage, any species which quarrels with its own ecology is one which likely destroys its own future. Ecology cuts across the traditional dualisms of nature and culture, human and nonhuman, living and nonliving systems presenting a method of tracing connections through entangled technocultural phenomena which have frequently been approached as distinct, divided and even oppositional. A pertinent example is the historical division between Marxist social justice advocates and their environmental justice counterparts, whereby Marxists criticized environmentalism as ‘a defensive movement in which the middle classes and capitalist entrepreneurs are attempting to protect their interests, which are increasingly threatened by the internal contradictions of capitalism' (Pepper 73). While such accounts do not dispute the reality of environmental degradation, they contend that such phenomena were not novel developments; the environmental ramifications of the coal pits and factories that fuelled the industrial revolution had always caused immiseration and detrimental health impacts to humans,3 but this suffering was borne primarily by the working classes: ‘The ecological movement has 3 Nonhuman concerns having been largely absent from the majority of Marxist–humanist accounts. It is, however, important to note that according to Marx 05–6): ‘Capitalist production … disturbs the metabolic interaction between man and the earth, i.e. prevents the return to the soil of its constituent elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing; it therefore violates the conditions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil … all progress in capitalist agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time is a progress towards ruining the more long-lasting sources of that fertility. … Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology… only by sapping the original sources of all wealth – the soil and the worker.' This focus upon ecology and metabolic rifts within Marx's writings has become central to contemporary eco-Marxism (Bellamy-Foster Moore . only come into being since the districts which the bourgeoisie inhabit and their living conditions have been exposed to those environmental burdens that industrialization brings with it' (Enzensberger 0). Whereas Enzensberger contends that environmental protests are merely manifestations of the bourgeoisie feeling the effects of the internal contradictions of capitalism, the adverse effects of Anthropocenic ecological crises will be primarily borne by people lacking the economic capacity for adaptation, or who are directly reliant on local environmental resources for their income. In other words, while there are geographically disparate effects expected to arise from ecological crises such as climate change, they tend to affect social groups proportionally to their economic status, with the poorest groups, whose labour is often directly tied to the land or oceans, and who lack the economic capacity for adaptive measures, hit the hardest. Consequently, within the globalized context of the Anthropocene, social justice issues cannot be understood as distinct from environmental justice issues. This entanglement of the domains previously understood as nature and culture, humanity and technology, or (human) history and (natural) geology, calls for an ecological ethic and political mobilization addressing the dire predictions of a planetary mass-extinction event predicated by industrial anthropogenic activity, while also questioning the anthropocentrism present in such claims. There currently exist several ecological ethics which contrast with conservationist approaches that seek the preservation of romanticized notions of a pre-industrial or pre- colonial nature and thereby depart from ecological approaches that are concerned with complex dynamical systems. Two prominent positions here are social and deep ecology. Social ecology maintains an anthropocentric perspective, centring on human societies and understanding ‘nature' as a series of resources to be utilized for human benefit, while contending that the concept of humans dominating nature arises from the social context of humans dominating other humans. Murray Bookchin 1) surmises the ethical approach espoused by social ecology as an ecology of freedom, which expresses ‘the reconciliation of nature and human society in a new ecological sensibility and a new ecological society – a re-harmonization of nature and humanity through a re-harmonization of human with human'. While social ecology goes beyond current understandings of value as primarily derived from economic wealth, critics such as Arne Naess , .and Jonathan Porritt argue that it maintains that nonhuman life is valued primarily in terms of utility to human societies and that while this exceeds economic usage, encompassing aesthetic and spiritual dimensions, the anthropocentric focus on ‘natural resources' requires challenging. The deep ecology perspective instead contends that nonhumans have intrinsic value: ‘the value of nonhuman life is independent of the usefulness these may have for narrow human purposes' (Naess 9). It proposes a biocentric ethic whereby humans are accorded no special ontological status and are compelled to act in a manner which will not reduce biological diversity, regardless of the impacts upon human society. Indeed, one of Naess's principles of deep ecology contends that for human and nonhuman life to flourish a substantial decrease in the human population is required, from a current global population of over seven billion to less than a hundred million. While Naess posits no methods to achieve this gargantuan population reduction, this argument has been criticized as misanthropic, neo-imperialist and racist (Bookchin Hardt and Negri 65–7), as a privileged, white, European man calls for a massive reduction in the global population. While questions of population are politically difficult, they must be understood in relation to what sort of existence is being posited. A future society which expects to use coal, shale oil and tar sands to power intercontinental travel, digital technologies and industrialized animal agriculture could sustainably support a miniscule population when compared to one using local renewable energy sources, eating a plant- based diet and rarely travelling by air (at least if using contemporary forms of fossil-fuel-based transportation). Indeed, while the controversial but influential IPAT equation (Impact = Population x Affluence x Technology) used to model human impacts upon ecological systems has been widely criticized for including technology as an unquantifiable weighting variable alongside population and affluence (which is measured by GDP per capita), it does at least foreground that the ecological impact of human populations can only be understood in combination with their technologies. We must, however, bear in mind that the richest per cent of the global population is responsible for half of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. Consequently, we see that it is vital to consider questions of social inequality and the differential ecological impacts of different ways of living into any discussion of optimal or sustainable global populations – a dimension which is entirely absent from IPAT – rather than homogenizing humanity into a singular force whose ecological impacts can be understood through the number of living individuals.4 While infinite population growth on a finite planet is clearly unsustainable, there are two major concerns with the discourse of overpopulation. First, the reductive disavowal of difference and inequality which provides a homogenized humanity and, secondly, the fact that this argument propagates 4 This has also been a major critique of the Anthropocene, which in some cases argues that an undifferentiated humanity is the cause of contemporary ecological crises see Moore Bonneuil and Fressoz . an apathetic stance whereby political urgency is disarmed by a sense that ecological problems are ultimately a result of there being too many people on the planet, rather than phenomena which can be addressed through collective actions aimed at curtailing the obscene levels of consumption associated with a relatively small percentage of humans and redistributing wealth more equitably. Furthermore, the pragmatic strategies that have historically proven successful at curbing population growth – decreasing child mortality rates, providing higher levels of education for women and access to contraceptives – are all socially desirable. Focusing upon improving lives by implementing these three things is likely to curb population growth without an explicit focus on reducing populations. Rather than adopting either social or deep ecological positions, my approach to media ecology implements an ecological ethic based on the positions of Gilles Deleuze, Felix Guattari and Gregory Bateson which cut across a social/deep ecology dualism, positing a form of perspectivism that argues for multiple ecologics, not a single ecology Chisholm Herzogenrath . This approach questions the notions of harmony and stability common to social and deep ecological constructions of nature, instead positing a multitude of ecosystems which exist balanced at points far from equilibrium. This approach questions the usefulness of adopting a single standpoint which purports to centre upon either humanity or all life, instead drawing upon Guattari and Deleuze's logic of the AND, a methodological pluralism which emphasizes pragmatic embodied praxis over abstract universals and either/or binary choices. This logic advances through assembling, bringing together disparate elements to build coalitions capable of producing systemic change that escape the individualist and commodified tendencies that currently dominate digital cultures. Scale and digital technoculture One of the key concepts which media ecology mobilizes to address this logic of the AND is scale. Thinking in terms of entangled scalar ecologies allows us to move between phenomena encompassing the micro-temporal and micro-spatial registers of voltages, photons and algorithms, through to the global infrastructures of international standards organizations, undersea cables, satellites, server farms, cellular towers and social media platforms. Indeed, as Jussi Parikka b: has recently stated, ‘to be interested in the multiple scales on which reality is built, co-constructed, is not a luxury, but a necessity for critical theory nowadays'. The concept of scale is applied in varying ways across a broad spectrum of academic disciplines, and outlining these debates surrounding scale is useful in clarifying how the term is deployed here.