{ rtf1 ansi ansicpg1252 cocoartf2578
 cocoatextscaling0 cocoaplatform0{ fonttbl f0 fswiss fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{ colortbl; red255 green255 blue255;}
{ * expandedcolortbl;;}
 margl1440 margr1440 vieww11520 viewh8400 viewkind0
 pard tx566 tx1133 tx1700 tx2267 tx2834 tx3401 tx3968 tx4535 tx5102 tx5669 tx6236 tx6803 pardirnatural partightenfactor0

 f0 fs24   cf0 As Fiona Mackenzie  s research reveals, the grounds for such resource mismanagement were laid during the colonial era when conservationist and agricultural discourses of betterment   were often deployed in the service of appropriating African lands. Focusing on colonial narratives about the environment and agriculture in the Kikuyu reserves between  and,Mackenzie traces the effects of the colonial bureaucracy  s authoritarian paternalism, of what James C. Scott calls the imperial pretensions of agronomic science.   Not least among these deleterious effects was the recasting of the gender of the Kikuyu farmerthrough a colonial discourse of betterment that was integrally linked to the reconstruction of agricultural knowledge.   Thus  and this has profound consequences for the priorities of the Green Belt Movement  colonial authorities failed to acknowledge women as primary cultivators. This refusal had the effect of diminishing the deeply grounded, adaptable knowledge (both ecological and agricultural) that women had amassed.   
Maathai  s refusal to subordinate the interwoven questions of environmental and social justice to the priorities of either spectacular conservation or industrial agriculture has proven crucial to the long-term adaptability of the GBM, allowing the movement to regenerate itself by improvising alliances with other initiatives for sustainable security and democratic transformation. Although it was the theatre of tree planting that initially garnered Maathai and her allies media attention and international support, they expanded the circles of their activism, mobilizing for campaigns that ranged from the release of Kenya  s political prisoners to debt forgiveness for impoverished nations. The Green Belt Movement  s intersectional strategy helped integrate issues of attritional environmental violence into a broad movement for political answerability that, in turn, helped lead to democratic elections in Kenya in.   
The positioning of the GBM at the crossroads between environmental rights and women  s rights makes historic sense. Women in Kenya have born the brunt of successive waves of dispossession, dating back to the late nineteenth century, when the British colonialists shifted the structures of land ownership to women  s detriment. Previously, land had belonged inalienably to the extended family or clan; with the introduction of colonial taxation that same land became deeded to a male deemed to be head of the household. As taxation forced more and more Kenyans into a wage economy, and as (     rst under colonialism and later under neocolonial structural adjustment) cash crops like tea, coffee, and sugar cane shrank the arable land available for food production, women became disproportionately marginalized from economic power. In the resultant cash economy, men typically owned the bank accounts.   
Rural women suffered the perfect storm of dispossession: colonial land theft; the individualizing and masculinizing of property; and the experience of continuing to be the primary tillers of the land under increasingly inclement circumstances, including soil erosion and the stripping of the forests. As forests and watersheds became degraded, it was the women who had to walk the extra miles to fetch water and       rewood; it was the women who had to plough and plant in once rich but now denuded land where, without the anchorage of trees, topsoil was washed and blown away. In this context, the political convergence of the campaigns for environmental and women  s rights in Kenya made experiential sense: women inhabited the betrayals of successive narratives of development that had brutally excluded them. The links between attritional environmental violence, poverty, and malnutrition was a logic they lived. So when the Moi regime laid claim to Karura Forest and Uhuru Park for private development   schemes, Maathai was able to mobilize women who had historically been at the raw end of plunder that bene   ted minute male elites, be they colonial or neocolonial in character.   
It is a measure of the threat that this intersectional environmentalism posed that in  the regime demanded (ultimately without success) that the women  s movement and the green movement disengage from one another. What the regime foresaw was that these women tending saplings in their rural nurseries were seeding a civil rights movement that could help propel a broader campaign for an end to direct and indirect violence in the name of greater political answerability.   
The repeated showdowns between the GBM-led civil rights movement and Kenya  s authoritarian regime offer a salient reminder that, for all the elaborate, often invaluable theorizing about cosmopolitanism and globalization, the nation-state remains a potent actor, in societies as diverse as Kenya, Venezuela, Indonesia, China, and India. Yet in much contemporary environmental thinking in the humanities, the nation-state is either overlooked entirely or treated as a quaint anachronism. The struggles and successes of the GBM clearly cannot be understood outside the particular dynamics of Kenya  s national authoritarianism. That said, they also cannot be viewed solely within a national frame: local and global geopolitics contributed in complex, often unpredictable ways. For if the forces arrayed against the movement were primarily from the ruling national elite, the resources Maathai drew on combined a national memory bank of anti-colonial resistance, meticulously local forms of organization and cultural knowledge, and expansively transnational alliances. On the one hand, the Green Belt Movement recognized that, to operate in a country where sixty-two languages are spoken, it was essential to work with teams of women     u64258 uent in the local tongue, conversant with local power dynamics, and possessing local environmental knowledge. On the other hand, the movement gained indispensable traction through support from the United Nations and Scandinavian funders.   
The United States played a complex role, as it would in the rise of Ken Saro-Wiwa  s Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People. If one of Sarowiwa  s primary adversaries was American petro-giant Gulf Chevron, operating collaboratively with Nigerian authoritarianism, in Kenya (a detail Maathai omits from her memoir) the American government refused to turn the screws on President Moi because they perceived him as a friendly authoritarian and valuable ally close to the volatile Horn of Africa. That said, both Maathai and Saro-Wiwa traveled to the United States and drew inspiration from the civil rights and environmental campaigns they witnessed there. That inspiration was profoundly personal but it was also  and crucially  rhetorical, granting each a vocabulary that helped them achieve an international resonance for what might otherwise have remained obscure campaigns for environmental justice for their nation  s or region  s poor.   
In  Maathai became one of  Kenyans airlifted to the United States under the Kennedy program. (When she published her memoir she couldn  t have foreseen how consequential that  program would be: accompanying her on that airlift was a young Kenyan named Barack Obama on scholarship to the University of Hawaii.) As a bene     ciary of the Kennedy airlift, Maathai got to study at a small college in Kansas; she proceeded for her graduate work to the University of Pittsburgh and, while there, was energized by listening to Martin Luther King at the height of his powers, an experience that contributed to her intersectional attitude to movement politics, whereby she would envisage environmentalism as one wing of a broader civil rights campaign. A few years after returning to Kenya, she and her early collaborators chose Earth Day to launch the GBM. She thus drew inspiration from her exposure to the civil rights movement and from a decisive event in the organizational history of the American environmental movement, while simultaneously adapting to Kenyan circumstances both of those animating precedents. In both instances, moreover, a movement  s ascent was intimately connected, in sometimes complicating ways, with an iconic     gurehead, be it Martin Luther King or Gaylord Nelson. What Maathai could not have foreseen was the way the relationship between her iconic visibility and anonymous collective action would compound her vulnerability to attack.   
Collective Activism and Genres of the Self   
Maathai  s account of her sojourn in the United States is shaped by a series of conventions, as the chapter title, American Dream,   suggests. Those conventional pressures surface most forcefully in Unbowed in the domain of genre: if her       rst book, a little-noticed manual on the Green Belt Movement, had a collective center, by the second book, a memoir commissioned by an American publisher in response to her Nobel Prize, she clearly felt greater pressure to recast that collective history as a personal journey with a singular autobiographical self as its gravitational center.   
Maathai was one of seven women who founded the Green Belt Movement, yet in Unbowed the other women never achieve any de     nition as characters. I observe this less as a criticism than as a way of signaling the intractable dilemmas that attend the movement memoir. To underscore this point: after Nelson Mandela emerged from prison, Little, Brown and Company paid him a high six-   gure advance for his autobiography. On becoming president, he predictably fell behind with his writing, so his publisher dispatched an American ghostwriter to help speed things along. The ghostwriter discovered, to the publisher  s consternation, that Mandela  s autobiography had advanced with only a smattering of I  s  ; his preferred, default personal pronoun was we   as in we, the ANC.   The ghostwriter was tasked with disaggregating that movement we   and channeling it into an I   story that American readers and Oprah viewers would recognize and respond to. For Maathai, as for Mandela, the single-authored movement memoir raises profound representational dilemmas intricately entangled with transnational power imbalances in the publishing industry  entangled, too, with the genre expectations of projected readers, who reside mostly in the global North. Maathai  s  Nobel Peace Prize  and with it, the publishers   investment in a celebrity memoir  intensi   ed the pressure on the writer to recast a collective struggle in largely personal terms. Under such circumstances, to testify is to con   rm certain genre expectations and thereby to shape the way political movements, not least environmental justice movements, are narrated and remembered.   
Although Unbowed is subtitled A Memoir,   that someone odd designation seems symptomatic of the mood of American publishing in the early st century, when memoir   was a hipper, more saleable category than the fusty-sounding autobiography   to which Unbowed more properly belongs. The memoirs that boosted the genre  s visibility, sales, and cultural cachet   Kathryn Harrison  s The Kiss, Mary Karr  s The Liar  s Club, Frank McCourt  s Angela  s Ashes, Marya Hornbacher  s Wasted, Dave Pelzer  s A Child Called It, Augusten Burrough  s Running with Scissors, and James Frey  s A Million Little Pieces  typically focused on a speci     c trauma (addiction, incest, bulimia) and had a narrow social frame, centered on familial dysfunction. They were written by unknown     gures and read largely for their intimate, sometimes scandalously, confessional tone. By contrast, Unbowed unfolds across a vast social canvas, is focused on a dysfunctional nation-state rather than a dysfunctional individual or family, and is authored by a woman of international renown. If this is a misery memoir   then the primary source of that misery is a patriarchal, authoritarian nation-state and the solution is not some personal twelve-step plan but collective dissidence which, in the writing, gets routed through an iconic individual life.   
By contemporary American memoir standards, Unbowed is wholesome, quite private, even withholding. As such the book has more in common with the older autobiographical tradition of, say, Ben Franklin, where the focus is on the grand sweep of a lifetime  s accomplishments. Maathai is less prone to self-hagiography than Franklin, but she is similarly inclined toward extracting lessons, even parables, from experiences: that hard work pays off; that, in her words, she needed to pull myself up by my bootstraps;   how the values instilled in her as a child stood her in good stead; how morality and optimism will see off adversity. In contrast to most contemporary American memoirists, Maathai represents her childhood and family as profoundly functional to the point of being idealized. Pitched somewhere between The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin and Nelson Mandela  s Long Walk to Freedom (with an environmental, feminist twist), Maathai  s narrative is didactic and solution-oriented. In her complex balancing act between self-effacement and heroic self-fashioning, she has to translate, at every turn, her selfhood into forms amenable to her largely American audience.   
Environmental Agency and Ungovernable Women: Carson and Maathai   
Wangari Maathai and Rachel Carson each sought, in their different cultural milieus, to shift the parameters of what is commonly perceived as violence. They devoted themselves to questioning shibboleths about development and progress, to making visible the overlooked casualties of accumulative environmental injury, and to mobilizing public sentiment  especially among women  against the institutionalized deceptions and pro      table complicities of a male power elite. Both writer-activists questioned the orthodox, militarized vision of security as suf   cient to cope with the domino effects of exponential environmental risk, not least the intergenerational risk to food security. Indeed, both saw the militarization of their societies  cold-war America of the late s and early s and Moi  s tyrannized Kenya of the s and s  as exacerbating the environmental degradation that threatened long-term stability (locally, nationally, and transnationally).   
Retrospectively, it is easy to focus on the achievements of these two towering       gures: the social movements they helped build, the changes in legislation and public perception they helped catalyze, Maathai  s Nobel Peace Prize, the selection of Silent Spring as the most in u64258 uential work of non    ction of the twentieth century. Yet it is important to acknowledge the embattled marginalization and vili   cation both women had to endure at great personal cost in order to ensure that their unorthodox visions of environmental violence and its repercussions gained political traction. Their marginality was wounding but emboldening, the engine of their originality.   
Carson and Maathai were multiply extra-institutional: as female scientists (anomalies for their time and place); as scientists working outside the structures and strictures of the university; and as unmarried women. On all fronts, they had to weather ad feminam assaults from male establishments whose orthodoxies were threatened by their autonomy.   
Although Carson had a master  s degree in biology,       nancial pressures and the pressures of caring for dependent relatives had prevented her from pursuing a Phd. Her background was in public science writing; she had no university af   liation, at a time, one should add, when only one percent of tenured scientists in America were women. But by the time she came to embark on Silent Spring, her best-selling books on the sea had given her some     nancial autonomy. Carson  s institutional and economic independence freed her to set her own research agenda, to engage in unearthing, synthesizing and promoting environmental research that had been suppressed or sidelined by the funding priorities of the major research institutions, whose agendas she recognized as compromised by the entangled special interests of agribusiness, the chemical and arms industries, and by the headlong rush to pro   table product development.   
Carson  s detractors questioned her professional authority, her patriotism, her ability to be unemotional, and the integrity of her scienti      c commitment to intergenerational genetic issues, given that she was a spinster.   Why is a spinster with no children so concerned about genetics? She is probably a Communist,   a former Us. Secretary of Agriculture intoned.   
Hostile reviewers dismissed Carson  s arguments as hysterically over-emphatic   and as more emotional than accurate.   The general counsel for Velsicol, a Chicago chemical company, accused Carson of being under the sway of sinister in   u64258 uences   whose purpose was to reduce the use of agricultural chemicals in this country and the countries of western Europe, so that our supply of food will be reduced to east-curtain parity.   Other commentators deduced that Miss Rachel Carson  s reference to the sel    shness of insecticide manufacturers probably re u64258 ects her Communist sympathies.   Carson  s nemesis, the chemical industry spokesman Dr. Robert White-Stevens (who gave twenty-eight speeches against Silent Spring in a single year) opined that if man were to faithfully follow the teachings of Miss Carson, we would return to the Dark Ages.   In the ultimate vili    cation of Carson as embodying a model of irrational female treachery, a critic in Aerosol Age concluded that Miss Carson missed her calling. She might have used her talents in telling war propaganda of the type made famous by Tokyo Rose and Axis Sally.     
Twenty-     ve years on and Maathai  s opponents were brandishing even more outrageous ad feminam threats and insinuations against an autonomous female scientist who threatened the political and environmental status quo. Maathai was not a spinster,   but she was a divorc 'e9e, a label her opponents wielded against her relentlessly. Like Carson, she was represented as overly emotional and unhinged, an unnatural woman, uncontrollable, unattached, without a husband to rein her in and keep her (and her ideas) respectable. If the chemical-agricultural establishment sought to dismiss Carson, who lacked a Phd., as unquali   ed to speak, Kenya  s power elite tried to discredit Maathai  the     rst woman in East or Central Africa to receive a doctorate in any scienti    c     eld  as suspiciously overquali    ed, as a woman who had to be brought down because she was overreaching. When she led the protests against government plans for the private development   of Uhuru Park, one parliamentarian declared, I don  t see why we should listen to a bunch of divorced women.   Another politician portrayed her as a madwoman  ; a third threatened to circumcise   her if she ever set foot in his district.   
As a highly educated woman scientist, an advocate of women  s rights, and a proponent of environmentalism for the poor, Maathai was vulnerable, on multiple fronts, to charges of inauthenticity and, like Carson, of unpatriotic behavior. A Kenyan cabinet minister railed against Maathai as an ignorant and ill-tempered puppet of foreign masters.   Another criticized her for not being enough of an African woman,   of being a white woman in black skin.   Such critics typically adhered to a gender-speci     c nativism: as Maathai notes, Kenyan men freely adopted Western languages, Western dress, and the technological trappings of modernity, while expecting women to be the markers and bearers of tradition.   President Moi (who imprisoned Maathai several times) chastised her for being disobedient  ; if she were a proper woman in the African tradition  [she] should respect men and be quiet.     
As Kwame Anthony Appiah has observed, the charge of inauthenticity is an inherently unstable one:   
Nativists may appeal to identities that are both wider and narrower than the nation: to  tribes   and towns, below the nation-state; to Africa, above. And, I believe, we shall have the best chance of re-directing nativism  s power if we challenge not the rhetoric of the tribe, the nation, or the continent, but the topology that it presupposes, the opposition it asserts.   
This is certainly borne out in Maathai  s case: she fell foul of proliferating uns    un-African, un-Kenyan, un-Kikuyu, unpatriotic, ungovernable, unmarried, unbecoming of a woman. But through her intersectional environmentalism she sought to circumvent the binaries of authentication. One strategy she used to sidestep such oppositional topologies was to seek out local environmental practices that were consistent with but not necessarily reducible to notions like biodiversity, the commons, and ecological stewardship. So, for example, Maathai recounts the Kikuyu injunction against cutting down       g trees which, with their widespread root systems and broad canopies help anchor sandbanks and shade vulnerable streambeds. That injunction, passed down to her in childhood by her grandmother, serves in her narrative to foreshadow the green values that, on returning from America, she rescripts in the discourse of environmental science. As a been-to   (a returnee from the West) and a go-between, Maathai ends up tacking back and forth strategically between nativist declarations (  I  m a child of my native soil  ) and invocations of a cosmopolitan science. By positioning herself as a transnational patriot with deep local roots, and by assiduously striving to reconcile her commitment to Kenya and to planetary values, Maathai seeks to de u64258 ect charges of treachery. So, too, she is careful not to articulate her views on women and tradition through a universalized feminism, but by invoking counter-currents within Kikuyu cultural practices.   
In these ways, we witness Maathai actively trying to defuse the accusation that her behavior is unwomanly and that her purported triple betrayal (of her gender, her culture, and her nation) is indissociable from her role as a Westernized agent of green imperialism.     
The vehement attacks on Maathai and Carson are a measure both of institutionalized misogyny and of how much is at stake (politically, economically, and professionally) in keeping the insidious dynamics and repercussions of slow violence concealed from view. While personally vulnerable, Maathai and Carson were threatening because they stood outside powerful systems of scienti     c patronage, academic intimidation, and silencing kickbacks. Their cultural contexts differed widely, but their extrainstitutional positions allowed them the scienti   c autonomy and political integrity to speak out against attritional environmental violence and help mobilize against it.   
Quotidian Terrors   
If Maathai  s nativist detractors sought to discredit her as an enemy of national development,  when awarded the  Nobel Peace Prize she faced, a different style of criticism from abroad. Carl I. Hagen, leader of Norway  s Progress Party, typi     ed this line of aggressive disbelief: It  s odd,   Hagen observed that the [Nobel] committee has completely overlooked the unrest that the world is living with daily, and given the prize to an environmental activist.   The implications of Hagen  s position are clear: nineteen months into the Iraq War and, amidst the war in Afghanistan, the wider war on terror,   and tumult in the Middle East, Congo, Sudan, and elsewhere, to honor an environmentalist for planting trees was to trivialize con u64258 ict resolution and to turn one  s back on the most urgent issues of the hour.   
Maathai, however, sought to recast the question of urgency in a different time frame, one that challenged the dominant associations of two of the early twenty-     rst century  s most explosive words: preemptive   and terror.   The Green Belt Movement focused not on conventional ex post facto con u64258 ict resolution but on con u64258 ict preemption through nonmilitary means. As Maathai insisted, many wars are fought over natural resources. In managing our resources and in sustainable development we plant the seeds of peace.   This approach has discursive, strategic, and legislative rami    cations for the global war on terror.   Most of our planet  s people face more immediate terrors than a terrorist attack: creeping deserts that reduce farms to sand; the incremental assaults of climate change compounded by deforestation; not knowing where tonight  s meal will come from; unsafe drinking water; having to walk     ve or ten miles to collect     rewood to keep one  s children warm and fed. Such quotidian terrors haunt the lives of hundreds of millions immiserated, abandoned, and humiliated by authoritarian rule and by a purportedly postcolonial new-world order. Under such circumstances, slow violence (often coupled with direct repression) can ignite tensions, creating   u64258 ashpoints of desperation and explosive rage.   
  Local disasters,   writes Wai Chee Dimock, are the almost predictable side effects of global geopolitics. They are part of a larger distributive pattern  a pattern of unequal protection that Ulrich Beck calls the global  risk society    with the risk falling on the least privileged, and being maximized at just those points where the resources have been most depleted.   Dimock is re   u64258 ecting here on the impact on the poor of the prelude to and the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, yet her words apply with equal force to contemporary Kenya and many other societies in the global South, where structures of slow violence sustain tinderbox conditions that cynical political elites can readily ignite at great cost to a society  s systemically disenfranchised.   
Perhaps to Hagen and others like him, tree planting is con   u64258 ict resolution lite; it lacks a dramatic, decisive, newsworthy military focus. But Maathai, by insisting that resource bottlenecks impact sustainable security at local, national, and global levels, and by insisting that the environmentalism of the poor is inseparable from distributive justice, has done more than forge a broad political alliance against Kenyan authoritarian rule. Through her testimony and through her movement  s collective example, she has sought to reframe con u64258 ict resolution for an age when instant cinematic catastrophe has tended to overshadow violence that is calamitous in more insidious ways. This, then, is Wangari Maathai  s contribution to the     war on terror  : building a movement committed, in her words, to reintroducing a sense of security among ordinary people so they do not feel so marginalized and so terrorized by the state.     
   
 
Unimagined Communities   
Megadams, Monumental Modernity, and Developmental Refugees   
The highest expression of dignity can be summed up in the single word No!     
  Dai Qing, China: Rivers and Dams,   Goldman Environmental Prize speech   
If the idea of the modern nation-state is sustained by producing imagined communities, it also involves actively producing unimagined communities. I refer here not to those communities that lie beyond the national boundaries but rather to those unimagined communities internal to the space of the nation-state, communities whose vigorously unimagined condition becomes indispensable to maintaining a highly selective discourse of national development. Narratives of national development are partial narratives that depend on energetically inculcated habits of imaginative limit, habits that hide from view communities that inconvenience or disturb the implied trajectory of unitary national ascent. Assaults on a nation  s environmental resources frequently entail not just the physical displacement of local communities, but their imaginative displacement as well, indeed on the prior rhetorical and visual evacuation of those communities from the idea of the developing nation-state. This imaginative work of expulsion typically predates the arrival of the police, the dogs, the lorries, the bulldozers, and the engineers. Thus the direct violence of physical eviction becomes coupled to an indirect bureaucratic and media violence that creates and sustains the conditions for administered invisibility. The result is what I have called spatial amnesia, as communities, under the banner of development, are physically unsettled and imaginatively removed, evacuated from place and time and thus uncoupled from the idea of both a national future and a national memory.   
We witnessed a classic instance of this process with the invention, under apartheid, of what were called surplus people.   Largely women and children, these surplus people   were deemed super   u64258 uous to the labor market and to the idea of national development and were forcibly removed or barred from cities. Trucked to remote rural areas  the so-called dumping grounds    they were resettled   in overcrowded conditions, with no viable means of sustenance. The consequences  human and environmental  were disastrous. Crucially, the dynamics of forced removal depended both on direct police violence and on the administration of an imaginative violence whereby certain communities were designated indispensable to the nation and others designated expendable and driven  literally trucked  out of sight. This invention of surplus people through the conjoined processes of imaginative expulsion and forced removal was far from unique to apartheid South Africa. Indeed, the production of ghosted communities who haunt the visible nation has been essential for maintaining the dominant narratives of national development, a process that has intensi   ed during the era of neoliberal globalization. The intertwined processes of imaginative and physical eviction have assumed a particularly dramatic force around the construction of megadams, those iconic structures of monumental modernity that serve to concretize the idea that developing nations are catching up,   as evidenced by spectacular, televisable, soaring feats of world-class engineering.   
When it comes to narratives of resource development  whether of water, oil and gas, minerals, or forests  the people recast as surplus   are most often rural, or at least people sent ricocheting between rural and urban desperation. Often they are ecosystem people, dependent for their survival on the seasonal cycles of adjoining ecosystems and therefore often living in circumstances of necessarily adaptable mobility. In many instances, their relationship to the land is historically deep but legally informal. Thus their imaginative expulsion from narratives of national development is facilitated by the frequent lack of of     cial title deeds to the ecosystems that have sustained them for centuries or, in some cases, millennia.   
In considering the unimagined communities cast into shadow by the looming imaginative edi      ce that is the megadam, we may usefully append to the idea of surplus people two other notions: developmental refugees   and uninhabitants.   The anthropologist Thayer Scudder coined the term developmental refugees   to convey the calamitous fallout of megadams (largely World Bank funded) that he had charted for decades in the global South. Scudder estimated the number of people displaced by such dams at somewhere between  million to  million. Almost without exception such displacements have resulted in declining key barometers of quality of life: nutrition, health, infant mortality, life expectancy, and environmental viability. Even the World Bank itself determined in a  study that of  dam resettlement projects it had funded, only one had involved adequate compensation and rehabilitation for those resettled.   
The developmental refugee   is a poignantly paradoxical       gure. Development implies positive growth, ascent toward a desirable end; refugee implies   u64258 ight from a grave threat  in this case, the threat of development-in u64258 icted destitution or even, when it comes to megadams, of drowning. In horizontal terms, the notion of the developmental refugee holds in tension an of   cial, centripetal logic of national development on the one hand and on the other, a terrifying, centrifugal narrative of displacement, dispossession, and exodus. In vertical terms, the megadam as icon of national ascent becomes coupled to the descending prospects of communities that have become ecologically unmoored, cut off from a drowned commons that, however modestly or precariously, had proffered a diverse diet, a livelihood, and a sustained temporal identity of continuity within change. In the wake of the megadam such communities are, in the most literal sense, inundated by development.   
The idea of developmental refugees   overlaps with another paradoxical notion, that of the uninhabitant.   The term surfaces in an interview Rebecca Solnit conducted for her superb essay on the Nevada Test Site (in Savage Dreams: A Journey into the Landscape Wars of the American West). The essay stands as a powerful attempt to counter the cold-war reinvention of the Nevada Desert as an empty, isolated space, sealed against culture and memory. Solnit repopulates the emptiness by bringing into focus the people who had been turned into ghosted casualties of a federal project of imaginative self-enclosure that concealed them from view: the downwinders and the Western Shoshone on whose territory the nuclear tests were conducted, as well as their Soviet counterparts, the nomads of the Kazakhstan Desert/Semi-Palatinsk, people whose lands, culture, and rights Soviet explosions decimated during the violently contrapuntal rivalry from cold-war nuclear development.   Savage Dreams offers a transnational bridge between those two desert spaces, both spaces of amnesia predicated on imaginative evacuations.   
There is an especially telling incident in Solnit  s nuclear journey that becomes central to the question with which this chapter began: what is the relationship between an actively imagined national community and actively unimagined communities on which the idea of national development depends? While traveling through southern Utah,  miles east of the Nevada Test Site, Solnit encounters a downwinder, Janet Gordon, who has lost many family and friends prematurely from cancer. The area Gordon and her family inhabited was largely Native land. Yet in the build-up to the nuclear explosions, this land was of     cially declared a virtually uninhabited area.   We became,   Gordon observes in a mordantly resonant phrase, virtual uninhabitants.     
Gordon  s phrase is readily adaptable to the imaginative force       eld of the megadam, for it holds in equipoise ideas of presence and absence  absence not as originary but as imposed through a war against presence, as inhabitants drop off of   cial maps and plummet into zones of invisibility. People like the Nevada Test Site  s Western Shoshone were evacuated not just from their lands but from public awareness  two intimately entangled processes of forced removal. Other residents of the area, like the Gordons, were not physically removed but had their status downgraded from inhabitants to virtual uninhabitants: they were and were not there, existing in a kind of vaporized dwelling.   
This violent conversion of inhabitant into uninhabitant has been a recurrent trauma amidst the spread of gargantuan dams across the so-called developing world. People viewed as irrational impediments to progress   have been statistically  and sometimes fatally  disappeared. The story behind Guatemala  s Chixoy Dam forcefully illustrates this. To quell opposition to the dam and to speed up the clearing of the submergence zone, in March  Guatemalan paramilitary units conducted a series of massacres, slaughtering  Maya Achi Indians. The brutality took a bloody, local form, but the decisive players were the invisible, bloodless transnational collaborators with the Guatemalan dictatorship: the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank who buttressed the dam with their loans. Their endeavors, in turn, were made possible by a consortium from American, Swiss, and German engineering consultants who declared in their feasibility report that in the tract of the studythere is almost no population.   Thus, with the stroke of a pen,  Project-Affected People    including many who would soon be murdered for development  became virtual uninhabitants.   
Megadams and the Countersublime   
Given America  s historic role as megadam pioneer, it is perhaps predictable that so many of the twentieth century  s most vocal literary opponents of hydraulic hubris  John Muir, Edward Abbey, Wallace Stegner, and David Brower  would be concentrated in the United States. All these writers, signi     cantly, lived in the lightly populated American West and all were associated primarily with a wilderness ethic. But in the twentieth century  s     nal year, a quite different strain of literary opposition to gargantuan dams rose to prominence with the publication of Arundhati Roy  s The Greater Common Good,   the     rst in a volley of polemics she launched against the serial damming of India  s Narmada River. Some,dams were slated for the river and its tributaries, including thirty megadams; most notorious was the mammoth Sardar Sarovar Dam, which became a symbolic focus for activists from the Narmada Bachao Andolan (Save the Narmada Movement), led by Medha Patkar, a cause that Roy  s voice helped amplify nationally and internationally.   
The historical timing, geopolitical circumstances, and rhetorical strategies of Roy  s classic essay set it apart in signi     cant ways from the dominant strains of American anti-megadam literature. First, The Greater Common Good   is a post  cold war essay whose backdrop is the hegemonic rise of neoliberal globalization, dominated by a single superpower in cahoots with the G, and the corresponding ascent of an antiglobalization movement.   
(  The Greater Common Good   appeared in,the year of the Seattle WTO protests.) A second major difference between Roy  s invective and most American anti-dam writing derives from a historical and geographical shift in the global big dam industry. By,India had become the world  s third most proli     c dam builder. Roy sought to expose the collusions between a fascist strain of Hindu nationalism at home and neoliberal globalizers, notably the megadam boosters at the World Bank and in the Western-based dam industry that, one notes, like the tobacco industry was shifting its exploitative center of gravity to the global South, where huge pro    ts could be accumulated in conditions where health, safety, and environmental regulations were absent, lax, or poorly enforced.   
The third, critical difference is this: the giant dams Roy opposed were located in rural areas densely populated with subsistence farmers, areas quite unlike the thinly peopled hinterland of the American West. Roy  s rhetorical strategies are thus remote from those associated with the traditions of the wilderness ethic. Instead, her approach borrows from and advances the rhetoric of an international environmental justice movement that did not exist in any comparable form during the years when Edward Abbey, much less John Muir, was writing.   
We can ground these differences by contrasting the strategies and circumstances of the Save the Narmada movement (and Roy  s writerly role within it) to those that characterized the mid-s movement  in which both Abbey and Brower were prominent  opposing Glen Canyon and other Colorado megadams. The driving spirit behind the loose alliance of monkey wrenchers and desert rats in the American West was anarchist; their strategic vocabulary was drawn from the wilderness sublime, a discourse that enfolded elements of eulogy and elegy. The wilderness sublime became inseparable from a contest over the rhetoric of the monumental: a clash between transcendent engineering and a transcendent geology invested with awe and grandeur. For Brower, the most beautiful place in all the region of Glen Canyon was a cavernous space, under the vaulting rock walls, that had been named the Cathedral in the Desert.   Brower, like Abbey, became a public relations maestro in the vernacular of the countersublime: Lake Powell is a drag strip for power boatsThe magic of Glen Canon is dead. Putting water in the Cathedral in the Desert was like urinating in the crypt of St. Peter  s.   An anti-dam coalition placed an advertisement in the New York Times that asked, Should we     u64258 ood the Sistine Chapel so tourists can get nearer the ceiling?     
Such strategies depended on a Manichean, trans-Atlantic split between a cultural and a natural sublime, whereby Europe  s soaring, hallowed architecture became shorthand for Culture and the American West  s soaring, geological edi     ces shorthand for Nature or, more speci   cally, Nature  s Nation. Thirty years on, in the Narmada Valley, such polarities were unfeasible for political, historical, and topographical reasons. At stake in the Narmada were literal temples not metaphoric ones, temples to be drowned, alongside the villages they had served for centuries, by the monsoon waters that rose higher each year with the ever-rising dam walls. When Roy writes that the Narmada dams were causing the submerging of culture,   she refers to the inundation of densely populated village cultures inextricable from   u64258  oodplain ecosystems in the only valley in India, according to archaeologists, that contains an uninterrupted record of human occupation from the Stone Age.   This is a far cry from the inundation of symbolic temples of nature whose paradigmatic witness is an antisocial, often misanthropic man roaming a wilderness in resplendent solitude.   
The aesthetic contrasts embedded in all this are deeply informed by divergent economic structures. The contest over the Colorado dams remained internal to the United States: the economics of the megadams was federally managed and nationally contained. By contrast, the damming of the Narmada Valley  as is typical in the global South, from Panama, Guatelmala, and Belize to Cameroon, Cambodia, and Krygystan  was dependent on transnational funding structures of neoliberal globalization. Hence the Sardar Sarovar became an iconic battle with rami     cations far beyond India. This is where Roy, for all her contentiousness within India, became an indispensable translator for international audiences of the wider implications the Narmada Valley struggle had for environmental justice movements elsewhere. She assumed this role by exposing the global machinery of the big dam industry, the paradigmatic plight of downstream tribals, the ecological costs and the connection of all of these elements to a hegemonic neoliberal global order.   
If, as I am suggesting, big dams themselves are (beyond any possible utility) a kind of national performance art, it was the genius of Abbey and his gonzo anarchists to recognize the dam wall as a blank staging ground for outsize guerilla theatre that could be projected into the homes of the       rst television nation. Abbey viscerally understood the high-stakes politics of spectacle and counterspectacle. The massive dam face represented the monumentalism of national modernity, but it could also represent  especially amidst s cold-war paranoia  the monumentalism of the apocalypse. Onto the blank canvas of the televised dam wall could be projected a nation  s outsize hopes, but also its outsize fears. Long before one could Photoshop nuclear explosions into the landscape, Abbey and his fellow gonzos unfurled a -foot sheet of black polyurethane down the face of Glen Canyon wall. This plausible crack, picked up with alarm by television stations, linked the elegiac anger of anti-dam anarchists to an apocalyptic visual rhetoric. If the death of Glen Canyon became a leitmotif in Abbey  s writing, perhaps for legal reasons, his activist response is generically divided, vacillating between nonviolent anti-dam activism in his non   ction and violence in his     ction. The closest he comes in his non   ction to advocating direct anti-dam violence  what one might euphemistically call the informal decommissioning of Glen Canyon Dam  occurs in Desert Solitaire, where he fantasizes about the loveliest explosion ever seen by man, reducing the great dam to a heap of rubble in the path of the river. The splendid new rapids thus created we will name Floyd E. Dominy Falls.   However, in his most celebrated novel, The Monkey Wrench Gang, Abbey moves beyond both fantasy and gonzo theatre and has his eco-anarchists push the lever that detonates the wall.   
The Politics of Visibility, the Politics of Scale   
Two epochal Indian environmental events occasioned Roy  s decision to redirect her creative energies from        ction toward the polemical, interventionist essay. The desert nuclear tests the BJP government conducted in May  (and to which Pakistan responded in kind) were followed in February  by an apparently unrelated development: after a four-year legal stay, the Supreme Court of India gave the go ahead to resume construction on the Sardar Sarovar Dam on the Narmada River. With two small essays on two outsize subjects  the megaweapon and the megadam  Roy launched her second career as an international writer-activist, whose central preoccupations are the politics of visibility, distance, and scale. What she alighted on, in these pre-/ essays, was the way a populist visual rhetoric of nationalism  a visual rhetoric one might describe as fusing the technological sublime with the sacralizing of spectacle  expressed and helped enable a fascist turn in India. That turn diminished the rights of the citizenry, widened the gap between haves and have-nots, and quickened the centralizing of economic power and privilege. Roy  s instincts for this dynamic foreshadowed what would become one of her signature, expansive themes over the next decade: during the post-/ war on terror,   she would rail in essay after essay against how a hubristic global, neo-liberal order was widening the gulf, inside the nation and beyond, between development  s bene   ciaries and its casualties. To borrow Gadgil and Guha  s useful opposition, the gulf was widening, in particular, between India  s omnivores and its ecosystem people.   
By pairing her essays on India  s nuclear tests and the Narmada Valley dams, Roy sought  controversially  to bring big dam building into the domain of violence. Through these essays, Roy gives focus to a larger drama: the way India  s outsize, self-assertive modernity depends on rendering invisible stories of national exclusion. As such, her interrogation of what counts as modernity becomes inseparable from her tenacious attentiveness to the conjoined politics of scale and the politics of invisibility.   
Together, Roy  s paired essays on the bomb and the megadam pose one central question: at the turn of the millennium, what did it mean to be a major modern nation? Or rather, what did it mean, as a nation, to display modernity? The detonation of a Hindu   bomb became a spectacle staged simultaneously as a declaration of great nation status, via the mastery of science and nature, and as a supernatural portent:  The desert shook,   the government of India informed us  The whole mountain turned white,   the government of Pakistan repliedOne scientist on seeing [the blast] said,  I can now believe stories of Lord Krishna lifting a hill.     On both sides of the border the bombs set off serial media explosions of national self-aggrandizement expressed through the languages of the technological sublime, national religious destiny, and a virile jingoism: We have proved we are not eunuchs any more.   We have superior strength and potency.   These are not just nuclear tests, they are nationalism tests.   The convergence of the technological sublime, manifest destiny, and a hubristic, jingoistic refusal of limit has, of course, its own variant in the entangled nuclear and hydrological histories of the American West. What do you do,   Wallace Stegner asks, if you are a nation accustomed to plenty and impatient of restrictions and led westward by pillars of       re and cloud? You try to engineer it out of existence.   The very notion of the Bureau of Reclamation is suggestive of such national hubris: the federal agency was tasked not with claiming the desert through megadams and irrigation, but with reclaiming it, as if the arid West were once fertile federal property wrongfully seized by sinister desert forces.   
In both Roy  s nuclear and her megadam essays, one senses a mistrust of her government  s outsize technological assertions of India  s modernity, of the way these purportedly unifying spectacles of imagined community have been predicated on violent habits of imaginative disconnection  what I am calling the nation  s unimagined communities. The much-vaunted survivable nuclear war against Pakistan rested on just such a dissociative fantasy: that contiguous nations sharing sky, air, and water could avoid being radiated and poisoned in unbounded ways when citizens on both sides of the nuclear divide were also ineluctably regional citizens of an unpartitioned Earth. One senses a similar turn in The Greater Common Good,   wherein Roy exposes the imaginative disconnect between the most ambitious river valley development project ever conceived in human history   and the human and ecological disasters that     u64258 ow from that grandiose project of national reengineering.   
Roy  s radical, controversial move was to view the Indian government  s nuclear and hydrological hubris as two versions of a single mindset rather than divide them into a purely malign and a purely benign spectacle of modernity. Her conjoining of her antinuclear and antimegadam polemics suggests this explicit pairing can help shift our perspective on what quali.     es as modernity. This  at least implicitly  is one alternative de   nition of modernity: The orbits of the powerful and the powerless spinning further and further apart from each other.   As William Finnegan observes in another context, It is simplistic, even misleading, to talk about whole nations as winners or losers under the current globalization regime, since there are, in every country, signi   cant groups of both winners and losers.   Thus, at the heart of Roy  s expos 'e9 of the megadam as a grandiose, highly selective, divisive     ction of Indian modernity lies an integrative ambition: the desire to imagine the Narmada Valley dams not just from the distant orbit of the powerful modernizers (those who, in her words, conduct imperialism by email  ) but from the more intimate orbit of the powerless as well, that is, from the vantage point of those whom we might variously call modernity  s surplus people, its developmental refugees, and its virtual uninhabitants.   
The Writer-Activist and the Submergence Zone   
At the heart of Roy  s polemical method is the very writerly subject of imaginative limit. If her nuclear essay engages the quandary of how to give sensory de     nition to the unimaginable  the more or less evenhanded disaster of atomic apocalypse  the companion essay protesting the mass damming of the Narmada River engages the imaginative dilemmas posed by an unequally distributed catastrophe. Here the primary quandary becomes how to bring into imaginative focus threatened communities and ecosystems rendered invisible by the celebratory developmental rhetoric that gushes from big dam technocrats, cabinet ministers, World Bankers, and media moguls. The World Bank, a larger-than-life character in Roy  s non.   ction, made an early, premonitory cameo appearance in The God of Small Things, when Estha strolls along the banks of the river that smelled of shit and pesticides bought with World Bank loans.   The very notion of the World Bank, one notes, contains a dead aquatic metaphor. Banks shore up investments, control streams of capital and global   u64258 ows. If we pause to re u64258 ect on the submerged metaphor of the World Bank, we see that a river runs through it.   
Across scores of essays, Roy returns to the connection between the tyranny of scale and the politics of a violent invisibility. These have become the signature subjects  the great binding themes  of her writings on environmental justice, globalization, empire, and the war on terror. It is no accident that, in the triumphal aftermath of The God of Small Things, she turned to confront the secular and religious gods of mammoth things: the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization, the American empire, the Murdoch empire, religious fundamentalism, the war on terror, nuclear proliferation, and the megadam. Her novel  s outsize success had bestowed on Roy a sudden, unexpected visibility that she chose to channel into challenging the largely opaque collusions between transnational and national forces that imperil the weave of human and biotic communities. Her essays acknowledge that the mechanisms of these giant, shape-shifting forces are dif     cult to track, visualize, dramatize, and expose  and hence successfully oppose  not least when they promote the megadam as a muni    cent, luminous icon of triumphal national progress, a bright beacon on the road to great nation status.   
In contrast to the encomiums that greeted the Hoover Dam, Roy  s approach to India  s most iconic megadam focuses not on the scale of the modern edi     ce but on the scale of the very modern forced removals it incurs. The dam  s outsize dimensions are easily calculable yet, symptomatically, the outsize dimensions of the displacements remain unknown. A direct relationship emerges between the massive imaginative displacement required to sustain the developmental fantasy of a benign, redemptive dam and the imaginative displacement required to suppress the fate of the human and nonhuman casualties of the submergence zone.   The bureaucratic euphemism of the submergence zone   itself suggests the drowning out of developmental refugee voices, voices rendered inaudible by the   u64258  oodwaters of gung-ho developmental rhetoric.   
Roy  s obsession with the politics of scale and the politics of visibility call to mind a similar preoccupation in the writings of John Berger, one of our most astute contemporary writer-activists on the links between neoliberal globalization and the transnational devastation of place, as community and ecosystem. In his preoccupation with ways of seeing and not seeing  with the invisibility industry  Berger is especially insightful on the violence wrought by the rationalizing developmental rhetoric of the zone:   
Extensive areas which were once rural places are being turned into zones. The details of the process varyThe initial dismembering, however, always comes from elsewhere and from corporate interests pursuing their appetite for ever more accumulation, which means seizing natural resources (     sh in Lake Victoria, wood in the Amazon, petrol wherever it is to be found, uranium in Gabon, etc.), regardless of to whom the land or water belongPeople in such zones lose all sense of residenceOnce this has happened, to restore any sense of domesticity takes generations. Each year of such accumulation prolongs the Nowhere in time and space.   
Berger  s outrage is directly pertinent to the transformation of places of residential subsistence and ecological complexity into hydrological zones and submergence zones that, in the violence of their euphemized effects, are second cousins to the so-called sacri      ce zones of military strategy. The patriotic-cum-technocratic discourse of zones displaces place, creating conditions for the transformation of inhabitants into surplus people, barely visible beside the seductive image of the megadam as a towering miracle of achieved modernity.   
When refugees are severed from environments that have provided ancestral sustenance they       nd themselves stranded not just in place but in time as well. Their improvised lives in makeshift camps are lives of temporal impoverishment. When a megadam obliterates a   u64258 ood plain whose ebb and   u64258 ow has shaped the agricultural,     shing, fruit and nut harvesting  and hence nutritional  rhythms of a community, it also drowns the past: the submergence zone swallows place-based connections to the dead, the dead as living presences who move among past, present, and future, animating time with connective meaning. It is in this sense that I read Berger  s warning of the generations it would take to rebuild domesticity.   For if forced removal involves agonizing adjustments to bleak accommodation, unfamiliar ecologies, and typically barren, hostile terrain, it involves the additional challenge posed by temporal violence: how to survive in a truncated, severed present, torn by involuntary displacement from the numinous fabric that had woven extended meaning from time-in-place.   
As one of the most sensational, visually arresting spectacles of development, the megadam readily de   u64258 ects attention from the undertow of violent underdevelopment that follows in its wake, especially in densely populated societies like India and China. The construction of Sardar Sarovar, Roy argues, involves an unacknowledged war.   Symptomatically, no of    cial     gures for the casualties of this war exist. The problem is not that such people have been reduced to statistics but that they  ve been reduced to nonstatistics, a whole different level of dehumanization  indeed, one de   nition of surplus people. To gain a more textured sense of the conversion of inhabitants of hydrological zones   into uninhabitants who (if represented at all)     gure as backward impediments to the developmental advancement of the nation proper, we need to consider the speci   c violent and nonviolent strategies deployed.   
Five main strategies have been used to deny the rights of hydrological zone   inhabitants. The       rst is the blunt threat of direct violence: forced removal at military or paramilitary gunpoint or via the barrel of a dam. (Here is Morarji Desai, addressing villagers in the submergence zone of the Pong Dam in : We will request you to move from your houses after the dam comes up. If you move, it will be good. Otherwise we shall release the waters and drown you all.  ) The second strategy (often used in tandem with direct violence) involves a rhetorical appeal to selective self-sacri   ce: your loss, your suffering is for the greater good  a heroic offering on the pyre of national development. (Here is Nehru, in,exhorting the communities about to be dispossessed by the Hirakud Dam: If you suffer, you should suffer in the interest of the country.  )   
The third strategy for denying hydrological zone   inhabitants their rights and diminishing their visibility involves the indirect violence of euphemism and acronym. The of     cial terminology favored by the World Bank (for decades the core backer of megadams in the global South) is PAPs  Projected-Affected People. This bloodless, technocratic, deviously neutral term obscures the fact that those affected are inevitably negatively affected  often doomed  by the project in question. Project affected   translates as involuntary eviction, loss of land, community dispersal, and plummeting life prospects. To cut through the pseudoneutrality of such bureaucratic jargon, big dam opponents have preferred a more direct language that underscores the violence involved, advancing terms that range from oustees   (an Indian neologism that has since garnered international currency) to Scudder  s developmental refugees.     
In a fourth strategy the rights of those inhabiting a projected submergence zone may be dismissed on the grounds that such people are culturally inferior  or indeed lack any culture to speak of. This strategy did not end with the waning of direct colonialism: in postindependence India, the Adivasis, or tribals, who together with the Dalits make up the majority of oustees have been treated as expendable because they  re widely viewed as culturally contemptible and marginal to the core Hindu nationalist parameters of Indian civilization, although the Adivasis   presence in India long predates Hinduism  s advent. I. M. Shah, a leading engineer in the Sardar Sarovar, advocated sterilizing all Adivasis, while Vidhut Joshi of Gujarat  s Gandhi Labour Institute argued that a culture based on lower level of technology and quality of life is bound to give way to a culture with superior technology and higher quality of life. This is what we call development.     
The treatment of such people as inconveniencing anachronisms in a globalizing economy is often vindicated through fused discourses of environmental and cultural utilitarian control, whereby the convergent unruliness of irrational   river people and an irrational   river must be straightened out and channeled into a national culture of rational development. We thereby witness  and this is far from unique to India  a combined assault on an unregulated   river and purportedly lawless   people. Such communities can be readily dismissed as living benighted lives; they belong, in the fullest sense of the dead metaphors, to a cultural backwater not the national mainstream.   
The plight of river-reliant Adivasis and Dalits leads us to the       fth strategy for abrogating the rights of those dispossessed by hydrological mega-schemes. For the question of cultural recognition  of what counts as a culture  is intimately connected to the question of what counts as belonging. The Adivasis  and indeed most oustees in the global South  do not have title deed to the riverbanks,   u64258 oodplains, river-dependent forests, and catchment areas that have sustained them, in some cases for millennia. Such people may belong to the land but, within a Lockeian logic of private property, the land doesn  t belong to them. Thus in terms of the right to remain (not to speak of the right to just compensation) they can readily be cast as uninhabitants, residual presences from a precapitalist era whose anachronistic criteria for dwelling may be overridden by the legal logic of private property as self-development within a larger narrative of national development. In these terms, oustees can be displaced without being dispossessed.   
For     u64258 oodplain people, as for desert people, to live adaptively on the land through cycles of mobility makes environmental and nutritional sense. One can assert that much without romanticizing ways of living that are often arduous, fraught with danger, and at times result in mismanaged resources. Recession agriculture, for example, which depends on a river  s seasonal vagaries, may involve a deeply cultural but always approximate environmental dynamic. However, the perils of mobile adaptation to the risky, unpredictable provisions of river and   u64258 ood plain and the forests they sustain pale beside the perilous life of the megadam refugee.   
In Lockeian (and in Jeffersonian) terms, to dwell in movement is an unacceptable, uncivilized, irrational contradiction: you are improving neither the physical land nor yourself and, by extension, you  re failing to advance the national interest. What counts as productive, legitimate, bureaucratically authenticated residence thereby becomes inextricable from the politics of visible self-improvement and the civilizational spectacle of the nation. Thus, through the logic of a selective enlightenment that discriminates against environmentally viable mobility, a deep temporal belonging is made shallow by the designation informal residents.   From there, borrowing from the pervasive discourse of the global war on terror,   it is only one rhetorical step to downgrading informal residents   who protest eviction to the status of insurgents.     
Through the invention of emptiness  emptiness being the wrong kind of presence    underdeveloped   people on underdeveloped   land can be rendered spectral uninhabitants whose territory may be cleared to stage the national theatrics of megadams and nuclear explosions, those certi     able acts that mark the developing   nation  s ascent into modernity  s pantheon. Emptiness is an industry that needs constant rhetorical replenishment: the promotion of megadams depends on such emptying out, on actively administered invisibility. Within the dynamics of invisibility and hypervisibility, the myths of emptiness generate unimagined  or at the very least, underimagined  communities. The rationalizing logic of forced removal and resource theft thereby suppresses an environmental justice variant of Walter Rodney  s insight: that underdevelopment is not as an original condition of backwardness crying out for modernization, but in large measure an in u64258 icted condition, the legacy of a very modern external plunder by far-off forces.   
In the national and transnational resource wars, a double paradox asserts itself. First, in what one might call the resource law of inverse longevity, the longer a people have dwelled in an area in a condition of mobile adaptation, the less they of     cially belong there, their tenure rendered precarious by a Lockeian logic of what counts as belonging. Their residence, if acknowledged at all, can be dismissed as extralegal. Second, in what one might call the resource law of inverse proximity, the closer people live to the resources being developed,   the less likely they are to bene   t from that development,   be it water from megadams or oil pumped from beneath their lands.   
Megadams and the Limits of Postcolonialism   
The twentieth century was the century of the megadam: in,no dam on our planet was higher than       fteen meters; a hundred years later, there were, dams that exceeded that height. This headlong rush not just to control the great rivers of the world but to control them with gargantuan structures had two primary political contexts. The     rst was the cold war, which saw the superpowers vying to demonstrate greater scienti    c and engineering supremacy, in the hydrological as in the nuclear domain. The megadam, like the mushroom cloud, made an awesome, cinematic statement of superpower prowess in the race to be the ermaster of natural mastery.   
Decolonization became the second primary political motor behind the proliferation of megadams. Nasser, Nkrumah, and Nehru were all seduced by the symbolism of epic dams at a time when these leaders were striving to give material solidity to a newly acquired state of independence. Grandiose dams (like the High Aswan in Egypt and the Akosombo in Ghana) assumed a national psychological signi     cance over and above their pragmatic promise. If the dam wars between the United States and the Soviet Union became one front in a cold-war rivalry for visible technological supremacy, in the newly independent nations of the global South the fervor for megadams became expressive of a different rivalry, one infused with an anxious politics of emulation: whatever our old colonial masters can do, we can do as well. Unlike, say, a rise in literacy rates or life expectancy, megadams served as highly visible, spectacular statements that new nations were literally soaring toward development by mastering rivers and reaching for the sky.   
Constructions on such a scale rendered material the trope of nation building: to erect a megadam was literally to concretize the postcolonial nation  s modernity, prosperity, and autonomy. No nation boasting such solid grandeur could be dismissed as backward or puny. Each dam was simultaneously an act of national self-assertion  independence writ large across the landscape  and an act of natural conquest. Nasser and his associates,   notes John Waterbury, could no longer regard the dam as simply a big engineering project, but rather came to hold it up as the symbol of Egypt  s will to resist imperialist endeavours to destroy the revolution.   Such redemptive symbolism gained populist traction, as crowds     u64258 ocked to the Egyptian parliament crying Nasser, Nasser, we come to salute you; after the Dam our land will be paradise.     
Yet ironically, in economic and political terms, these glamorous hydrological regimes of independence doubled as invisible statements of dependence that threw into question the very condition of postcolonialism itself. Literally and metaphorically, the glittering prestige projects of the megadams depended on submergence: of disposable people and ecosystems, but also on the submerged structures of dependence that lay beneath the     u64258  amboyant engineering miracles. For the megadams of the South depended on vast loans (typically from the World Bank, the United States, or the Soviet Union) that shackled new nations with high debt loads. Moreover   as in cases like the High Aswan and the Akosombo  where the pressures of cold-war competition and postcolonial aspiration converged, the dams unleashed torrents of political indebtedness to the     rst- and second-world superpowers. Structures of collusion arose between elites in the      rst, second, and third world around a related dynamic of invisibility: spectacular megadams require megafunding that offer seductive opportunities for masking gigantic graft.   
The Hoover Dam became the gold standard in the rush to emulation. In harnessing the Colorado, it unleashed a torrent of international imitators who took as their canvases the Volga, the Nile, the Niger, the Zambezi, the Yangtze, the Yellow, and the Parana, to name but a few of the most monumental. Although the Oregon Dam soon surpassed the Hoover Dam in scale, it was Hoover that established what became one of the signature discursive features of megadams, namely the contest over the language of transcendence. Hoover gave body to both practical purpose and aesthetic ideals by marrying a miraculous feat of American hydraulic engineering to a sublime spectacle of grandeur. From Hoover onward, megadams became places where the transcendentalisms of religion, nation, science, and art would converge. In this spirit Nehru would proclaim that dams are the Temples of Modern India,   and (in what was then Southern Rhodesia) the boosters of Kariba Dam would marvel at that glorious castle in the sky.   Kariba as transcendental feat of engineering was accompanied by Kariba the transcendental rescue epic  christened Operation Noah  to save the inundated valley  s megafauna from drowning. (The eponymous documentary became a nature classic.) Lost in the mix, overshadowed by the glorious sky castle and by Operation Noah, were the,displaced Gwembe Tsonga, forcibly driven from the valley they had inhabited for centuries and dumped in distant, semiarid terrain, amidst unfamiliar and nonsustaining ecologies.   
Small Forms and the Disease of Gigantism   
In his latter years, Nehru, formerly enamored of big dams as statements and vehicles of independence, became disenchanted with them, recognizing them as travesties of scale, destructive of local bonds and failing to deliver on their outsize promises. Addressing the Central Board of Irrigation and Power in November,Nehru concluded:   
For some time past, I have been beginning to think that we are suffering from what we may call the disease of gigantism.   We want to show that we can build big dams and do big things. This is a dangerous outlook developing in Indiathe idea of big   having big undertakings and doing big things for the sake of showing that we can do big things  is not a good outlook at all.   
The sustainable future, he continued, lay in the small irrigation projects, the small industries and the small plants for electric power.   Nehru  s prescient volte-face critiqued the seductive  yet typically inef      cient and destructive  forms of modernity engineered on a vast scale.   
During the high era of neoliberal globalization, the disease of gigantism   manifested itself in concrete and on paper: the physical hubris of giant dams was accompanied and enabled by an insuf     ciently studied, yet potent cluster of outsize genres of writing, prominent among them the World Bank feasibility study and the environmental impact report. (The latter, in the global South, was ordinarily ex post facto, published well after dam work had begun.) This issue of genre and scale is of direct pertinence to Arundhati Roy  s turn to the essay as a small, nimble form that allowed her to take on the weighty, leaden genres that gave ballast to the culture of the megadam and, beyond that, to the culture of developmental gigantism. Her quarrel with the genre of the report had several facets to it: she loathed the form, the diction, the voice, and the way all three colluded to render inaccessible what ought to be public knowledge. As a writer, this was her primary contribution to the NBA and to the international environmental justice movement: to expose the insidious, traumatic violence in u64258 icted on the most vulnerable, human and nonhuman, by the affectless language of technospeak. Language is the skin of my thought,   Roy observes. At The Hague I stumbled on a denomination, a sub-world, whose life  s endeavor was entirely the opposite of mine. For them the whole purpose of language is to mask intentThey breed and prosper in the space that lies between what they say and what they sell.     
Roy returns obsessively to that space between: that distance  of diction, genre, and geopolitics  that concentrates power and dissipates responsibility. Her writings against the disease of gigantism   speak into that gap, speak to the calamitous consequences, especially for ecosystems and ecosystem people, of development as remote control. The contest over access  to resources, power, and audiences  prompted Roy to shift her creative center from the novel to the essay, a form that allowed her to participate more directly and     u64258 exibly in the showdown between social movements, a showdown that acquired a generic dimension whereby the agile personal essay was set against the ponderous, strategically impersonal epic report.   
Roy  s essays stage intimate assaults on the calculated opacity, the profoundly consequential tedium, of the technocratic report that camou   u64258  ages violence while clearing a path for it in a language scoured of emotion. Extrapolating from her style, one can posit a connection between the uninhabited language of forum speak, policy speak, boardroom speak, and environmental impact speak and the failures of imagination that scour hydrological zones   of life, replacing threatened living forms with virtual uninhabitants.   
In all her writing, Roy teases out the relationship between distance and transgressive intimacies that cross chasms of caste, class, gender, nation, region, and religion. Her concern with the abstracting of life by distance re   u64258 ects her concern with hierarchies of visibility: the seen and the unseen, the tangible and the untouchable. If Roy writes against distance in many forms, one crucial variant is the distance between the incorporeality of corporate power and its convulsive, material effects. This gap poses particular challenges for the environmental justice movement, hence her call for writers   
who can translate cash-   u64258 ow chards and boardroom speeches into real stories about real people with real lives. Stories about what it  s like to lose your home, your land, your dignity, your past, and your future to an invisible force. To someone or something you can  t see. You can  t hate. You can  t even imagine.   
Roy thus turns to the essay as a form that, in temporal and sensory terms, holds the promise of the immediate, of a quick, inhabited retort to the unimaginable  and unimaginative  culture of the colossus. In this spirit, she calls for an art committed to undoing verbally and bureaucratically in   u64258  icted absence: [A]n art that makes the impalpable palpable, makes the intangible tangible, and the invisible visible. An art which can draw out the incorporeal adversary and make it real. Bring it to book.     
In bringing to book the deadly, long-distance administration of living rivers via the silted language of the hydro-bureaucrat  s report, Roy repeatedly returns to questions of narrative monopoly. The shrinking of knowledge to expertise and the centralizing of power  not least the power to tell  renders us unsighted, making it harder to inhabit the lived consequences of neoliberalism  s densely rationalized developmental narratives.   
Roy  s vocal tactics, by contrast, are expressly decentered. There  s a productive instability to her voice that keeps her audience off balance. She belongs, in that sense, to the tradition of the lyric essay as environmental polemic, a tradition that includes       gures as diverse as Edward Abbey and Jamaica Kincaid. All of them are cantankerous, rowdy, irreverent, but also by turns tenderly speci   c, interspersing a lyricism of the sentence and a lyricism toward living forms with blasts of sarcasm, parody, hyperbole, vehemence, and blunt anger. All three writers are exponents of what Raymond Williams called militant particularism,   but all are equally exponents of the calculated overgeneralization. In the process, they jettison any ambition of directing the essay  s formal possibilities toward building a quiet, readerly rapport, far less universal admiration. By seceding from what one might call the emotionally miniaturist tradition of the essay, Roy, Abbey, and Kincaid explode the form with outsize sentiments directed at outsize adversaries: developers, the tourist industry, empire, the World Bank  s hydrological regimes.   
If, as I  ve suggested, Roy  s de     ning subjects are the politics of visibility, distance, and scale, one witnesses through her activism a showdown between two highly engineered spectacles of modernity  the megadam and the megacelebrity, in this case a Booker Prize-winning author and icon of Indian national cultural pride. By appending her garlanded visibility to the environmental justice movement that opposed the Sardar Sarovar Dam, Roy plunged head   rst into the political quagmires of representation and displacement. She would be duly accused, among other things, of celebrity showboating, of ethical egotism, of impetuous self-involvement, of strategic na 'efvety, and of squandering her novelistic gifts on mere polemics. Some of these charges were speci    c to turn-of-the-millennium Indian politics, others echo familiar accusations against novelists, from James Baldwin to Nadine Gordimer, who have activated the essay  s polemical possibilities to advocate for political causes. Through her celebrity persona, Roy found herself in a paradoxical position: she represented the distance of privilege, so had to strive to surmount the suspicions that distance provoked by grounding her credentials through the Andovar movement. Moreover, while arguing for the devolution of the power to narrate, she herself would have to ward off charges that she was recentering narrative authority through her hypervisibility.   
In contrast to writer-activists like Ken Saro-Wiwa and Wangari Maathai, Roy was not a founding member of an environmental justice movement but a late af     liate. This complicated the fraught politics of representation and left her more vulnerable to attack on grounds of privilege, insensitivity, and usurpation. However, she persisted in using her celebrity visibility to try to amplify the cause of the Narmada River  s resource rebels. Moreover, she became a vital translator in four ways. First, she translated an impenetrably technocratic discourse into more accessible language and story lines. Second, she gave an Indian story an international audience of an order it would not otherwise have achieved. Third, alongside the NBA, Medha Pratkar, and Vandana Shiva, she articulated the battle over the Narmada River mega-dams to the international water wars, helping make the Narmada campaign an iconic struggle. Fourth, Roy placed destructive hydrological regimes in the broader transnational contexts of neoliberalism  s ascendant hegemony and the international opposition to that ascent. Through this last act of translation, Roy became, alongside Naomi Klein, the primary invigorating voice for a whole new generation of antiglobalization activists.   
Monumental Modernity, Ecological Democracy   
Collectively, the notions of surplus people, developmental refugees, and uninhabitants give us a language for contesting the narrative of the redemptive   
megadam as spectacular symbol of rational deliverance from irrational rivers and irrational cultures. At stake is submergence: of communities, ecosystems, and voices, as the emissaries of gigantism seek to drown out the narrative diversity that would expose the short-lived, impossibly contradictory combinations of permanent plenitude such emissaries promise in the name of a forward-thrusting (but selectively delimited) nationalism. But the megadams are transients, temporary sojourners in the long life of the river. All too often, they silt up, spread salination, poison the soil. They are also steeped in well-timed deceits: in,the World Bank estimated the Sardar Sarovar project would displace,people; eight years later, with the dam safely underway, the Bank reestimated the displaced at ,.   
George Perkins Marsh recognized as far back as  that large hydrological schemes redistribute more than water: The tendency of irrigation as a regular agricultural method is to promote the accumulation of large tracts of land in the hands of single proprietors, and consequently to dispossess the smaller land-holders.   Patrick McCully, our own age  s nonpareil critic of outsize dams, underscores this point: The story is a familiar one from Rajasthan to California. Irrigation schemes are promoted with the promise of land to the tiller, but end up delivering it to the absentee landlord.   Often, those not driven away end up as bonded laborers on what formerly was their own land.   
Big dams are thus diversionary in a triple sense. They divert water   and through water, land  from the powerless to the powerful. But they also divert attention, their glistening enchantments throwing into shadow unimagined communities. One recalls, in this spirit, Roy  s portrait of globalization as like a light which shines brighter and brighter on a few people and the rest are in darkness, wiped out. They simply can  t be seen. Once you get used to not seeing something, then, slowly, it  s no longer possible to see it.     
Vandana Shiva is right: [T]he water crisis is an ecological crisis with commercial causes but no market solutionsEnding the water crisis requires rejuvenating ecological democracy.   For that to be achieved we have a long way to go. As I write, the all-too predictable script of hydrological hubris is repeating itself in Ethiopia, in an unequal battle between resource omnivores and ecosystem peoples. Dam work has begun on the Omo River: the contract for the dam, which will create the second-largest reservoir in sub-Saharan Africa, was signed for almost two billion dollars with an Italian dam construction company. No tenders were made and the        rst environmental impact report was published two years after the dam  s construction had begun. The procedures were so scandalously immoral that even the World Bank withdrew its funding, leaving the government of Ethiopia  one of the world  s poorest, most debt-laden nations  saddled with a shortfall of over $ million.   
The Omo River megadam may deliver electricity and graft to the capital  s elite, but the downstream tribes whose livelihoods and ecosystems are most at risk will be left literally and metaphorically in the dark. Informed by a BBC reporter of the imminent damming of their river, they declared they would take up arms against the government. (The tribes in Ethiopia  s impoverished southwest are awash with arms that have     u64258 ooded in from the neighboring con u64258 ict in southern Sudan.) One elder observed that the survival of his people depended on three rocks that hold up the pot: cattle; crops grown on higher ground in the rainy season; and in the dry season,   u64258 oodplain (recession) agriculture. If the river is narrowed and controlled from above, two of those rocks will be removed: [T]he pot will topple over and my people will starve.   The most probable scenario is this: the deadening of the river  s seasonal pulse will provoke resource wars among the heavily armed tribes who live downstream from development.   
This hydrological story  as happens so often  doesn  t end at the border. The Omo River drains into the largest lake in northern Kenya, where tribes       nd sustenance through a blend of     shing, cattle herding, agriculture, and hunting. Once the dam throttles the in u64258 ow of fresh water, the vast lake (whose salinity is already rising) will become fatally salty, un   t for humans, cattle, wildlife, crops, and     sh. The ecosystem  and the cultures of ecosystem peoples dependent on it  are at risk of collapse. Together, the dam and the con u64258 icts it stirs up on both sides of the border will result in new waves of developmental refugees.   
Despite the formidable odds, sometimes diverse, creative coalitions between local and international activists successfully turn back the mega-dam juggernaut. When in the late s the Brazilian government, emboldened by a $ million World Bank loan, announced plans for a massive hydroelectric project on the Xingu River, eleven Indian nations were slated for displacement by     u64258 ooding. Al Gedicks recounts how the chief of one of those nations, Paulinho Paiakan of the Kayapo, his cousin Kube-I, and Darrell Posey (a North American ethnobiologist who had long worked with the Kayapo) seeded a powerful trans-tribal and international oppositional alliance. In an effort to blunt their initiative, the Brazilian government charged the two Kayapo leaders (along with Posey) with contravening a law that banned foreigners from criticizing the government. Under an astonishing statute, native peoples, who had inhabited the Amazon for millennia, could be designated as foreigners and therefore subject to the gagging measure. Thus the threat of physical expulsion from their lands by   u64258  ooding was compounded by the imaginative and legal expulsion of the Kayapo from the idea of the nation. But these uninhabitants fought back successfully:  native leaders from across the Americas descended on the proposed dam site in protest and, after an international outcry, the World Bank cancelled the loan.   
That insurrection bought the Kayapo and allied Amazon tribes some time: two decades, to be precise. For as I write, the Xingu River water wars have begun all over again. In August,Brazil  s former president, Luiz In 'e1cio Lula da Silva, authorized construction on the $ billion Belo Monte Dam on the Xingu, throwing into jeopardy the future of the Kayapo and a score of other tribes. Belo Monte  slated to be the world  s third largest dam and a destructive monster of gargantuan inef     ciency  is catalyzing yet again a vital coalition of resource rebels.   
   
 
Stranger in the Eco-village   
Race, Tourism, and Environmental Time   
[Conservation biologists and political ecologists] tend to speak entirely past each other.Conservation biologists segregate nonhumans; political ecologists too often take them for granted as resources for human use. Instead, we might want to look at how species and populations slip in and out of markets, in and out of cultural attention, and in and out of a whole spectrum of not-yet-fullydescribed interactions between humans and nonhumans.   
  Anna Tsing, Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection   
Anna Tsing, one of our most incisive thinkers about globalization and the environment, may be writing here about Indonesia, but her insights can be productively adapted to South Africa, where the segregations of humans from nonhumans have long been implicated in the violent segregations of humans from humans. South Africa  s traumatic history of colonial conquest, land theft, racial partition, and racist conservation places particular pressure on those conservation biologists, political ecologists, writers, and activists committed to reimagining, during the postapartheid era, their society  s inherited cultures of nature.   
This transformative task is rendered more urgent by South Africa  s rare environmental signi     cance: only two nations, Brazil and Indonesia, surpass it in biodiversity. South Africa thus combines, in combustible form, extreme ecological wealth and a postapartheid legacy of extreme economic and territorial inequity. A major   u64258 ashpoint for the tension between these extremes remains the game reserve, that contradictory, potentially lucrative, historically troubled space that promises encounters with the timeless   Africa of charismatic megafauna yet risks reinscribing the society  s dominant culture of nature as racially exclusive and hostile to political transformation. Against this backdrop, we need to explore what I call racialized ecologies of looking in relation to environmental amnesia. This environmental dynamic between seeing and not seeing, between remembering and forgetting, is forcefully exempli    ed by the game reserve. But it has a broader pertinence to the challenges of reconciling environmental justice, political transformation, biodiversity, and touristic expectations that have been shaped by the international marketing of nature.   
Across much of southern and East Africa, game reserves and native   reserves have shadowed each other historically in the interdependent administrations of conservation, leisure, and labor. The noun reserve   may refer to either a sanctuary or a place of involuntary con     nement  a refuge or a cage. This double valence carries a special force in South Africa, suggesting both spaces reserved for environmental protection and the native   reserves (precursors to the Bantustans) that served as holding pens in the circuits of migrant mine labor. Because South Africa  s ecologies of enclosure are ghosted by traumas of forced removal, the destiny of the game reserve  within what Njabulo Ndebele calls the postapartheid liberation of leisure    remains inextricably bound to the racial dynamics of sanctuary and trespass, memory and amnesia, visibility and invisibility, looking and looking away.   
To illuminate these dynamics I trace in this chapter four journeys, one autobiographical, two non     ctional, and one     ctional. Collectively, these journeys track the temporal and racial performances of wild Africa   through the transnational questions that contour them, not least the international tourist feedback loop whereby the lucrative global branding of charismatic megafauna as quintessentially South African shapes both tourists   expectations and the nature industry that greets them. Such circular expectations, I suggest, can inhibit expanded access to what have been painfully exclusive spaces and retard a broader commitment to biodiversity that isn  t reducible to  and is sometimes incompatible with  the spectacular concentrations of megafauna that drive South Africa  s nature industry.   
Canned Lions and an Eternity of Bush   
In the run-up to Nelson Mandela  s election in,South Africa experienced considerable white     u64258 ight. One of the less-noted side stories was a surge in megafauna for sale  lions, elephants, crocodiles, hippos, and the like  sent to market by emigrating whites who had shut down their circuses and private zoos. At the time, I was covering the election in the country  s Eastern Province and heard word of a wildlife entrepreneur, J. P. Kleinhans, who had converted his sheep farm into a hybrid space  half game reserve, half hunting lodge. I sought him out upon hearing rumors that some of the seventy lions in his reserve had been purchased on the white- u64258 ight black market and that he was charging foreign trophy-hunters top dollar to shoot dangerous African animals that were in fact canned lions,   circus retirees put out to the carnivore  s equivalent of pasture.   
Kleinhans greeted me with a hearty air of practiced informality: J. P. Kleinhans, just call me Jp., Texas style.   His huge palm in the center of my back, he steered me into the lodge lobby where I found myself surrounded by lion, buffalo, hippo, warthog, bush pig, and a dozen species of antelope, all in half-body mounts, stampeding toward me through whitewashed walls.   
Following him through a second door, I entered arguably the world  s most voracious master bedroom. Mounted carnivores massed every-where  across the     u64258 oor, through the air, obscuring windows. The bed was surrounded. A leopard slunk by the pillow, as if waiting for husband and wife to drop their guard and dip into sleep. A lioness pushed past some jackals squabbling over     rst rights to the kill. Above the bed hung a vulture with eight-foot wings, beak tilted down, glassy eyes wide, searching the duvet for any whiff of carrion or death. What kind of person, I wondered, would choose to wake to vulture talons, to stagger from some convulsive dream into a hyena  s huge, mocking teeth?   
As we stepped outside, beyond his theatre of risk, Kleinhans made a tentative allusion to the slur of domesticity that had adhered to his lions. I  ve been to the States to hunt. But let me tell you, man, it  s different there. Their animals, compared to ours, they  re all so tame.   We were soon bumping across the thornveld in his jeep, Kleinhans recounting how his son and a school friend had survived a recent mauling by some lions    just over there.   As he spoke, I felt an anxious determination in him that the tired, AARP lion that had spent its life leaping meekly through circus hoops be crushed by that other       gurative lion, the untamable, almighty king of beasts, whose rule since time immemorial had terrorized the African bush. Kleinhans, as a wildlife image manager, was clearly fearful that the reputation of his lions (including his lionesses) was being feminized. It was, after all, the aura of explosive risk that would give his lions, male and female, their commercial teeth. His economic survival and male dignity depended on decommodifying the purportedly canned lions in order to recommodify them as a different product  pure, uncanned embodiments of a snarling, timeless African authenticity that couldn  t be bought elsewhere.   
  Almost anything Africa has got to offer,   Kleinhans interjected, you can kill it here, right here at Wolwekloof. The Americans love this place. One client, he told me, he  d traveled all over  Masai Mara, Zambia, Namibia, Kruger Park. But he said here at Wolwekloof, for the       rst time, he  d touched the real Africa.     
Kleinhans had no blacks working at his game lodge: My wife and me, we made enough sons to do the job. I don  t need blacks here.   (His wife and female relatives took care of domestic chores  the cleaning, cooking, and secretarial side of things.) At the very moment of black empowerment in the society at large, Kleinhans was creating a racial and temporal enclave, a timeless island outside a time of change. His brochure promised his American (and Russian, Italian, German, and Canadian) clients an exclusive   experience  a word that resonated in complex ways in a country whose psychic and physical landscapes bore deep scars of enclosure and expulsion.   
Many of his American clients, he noted, loved to bag their lions with crossbows. I pictured the scene as he described it: Kleinhans picks up his client at the airport, drives him to the lodge, where he enacts some ersatz bow-and-arrow hunt, half in the spirit of Iron John, half National Geographic pigmy, while accruing, before being whisked back to the airport, both a trophy lion and an indelibly African adventure shielded from any inconveniencing encounter with living Africans.   
It would be easy to read Wolwekloof as a straightforward narrative of atavistic, Afrikaner self-enclosure, of a racially and historically threatened man barricading himself against history, democracy, and black empowerment. But to that narrative we must add a complicating twist. If the post-apartheid turn disturbed Kleinhans, he also recognized in it fresh business opportunities. With foreign tourists and hunters pouring in under Mandela, Kleinhans could capitalize on resilient mythologies of international white masculinity for which the lion hunt could serve as a seductive, pro      table shorthand. In creating a racio-temporal island in a sea of black majority rule he was simultaneously reaching out to an oceanic white wildlife kill-or-consume culture that stretched beyond the nation. By internationalizing his parochialism, Kleinhans was articulating himself to the white call-andresponse of the charismatic megafauna touristic feedback loop.   
Foreign hunter-tourists could be       erce in their demands; and what they demanded was the prospect of an ancient African ferocity, embodied not only in the king of beasts but in the landscape  s untamed visage too. These projected desires had solidi    ed around Kleinhans  s alfalfa problems, which were compounding his canned lion problems. His clients kept grumbling about an alfalfa     eld on a distant farm visible from one corner of the lodge. The     eld spoiled the experience, they said; it didn  t look African. In order to expunge from view agriculture  s domestic taint, Kleinhans was busy erecting new accommodation for his hunter-tourists    Zulu   huts on a hillside that guaranteed panoramic vistas unsullied by labor, human necessity, or food production. Like the reed baskets, masks, and beadwork that adorned the lodge, his Zulu   huts would foster the ambience of a cultural village sans villagers. By swiveling the view, Kleinhans could now provide his tourists with the sight lines they demanded, guaranteeing them a genuine simulacrum of foreign visual expectations of an authentic Africa.   
  Don  t get me wrong,   Kleinhans said, tipping back his Elk Lodge baseball cap. I like the American. But the thing about the American is you have to speak his language. What the American wants when he comes here is an eternity of bush.     
I stood with him at that hilltop Zulu   hut looking down at the bushveld scene he  d laid out for his clients: a seemingly endless temporal panorama of undying purity that his hunters could enter to make their kills.   
Six months after visiting the lodge, I read in a local newspaper that Kleinhans and a Texan client had heard a distant ruckus one night: two lions brawling. The men had driven to the       ght where Kleinhans attempted to distract the warring lions by throwing them some donkey meat. When that failed, he walked toward them shouting and waving before trying to part them with bare hands. The lions turned on him and mauled him to death.   
Kleinhans died a performer in the transnational theater of Wild Africa on a stage crowded with anxieties about race, white manhood, domesticity, class, risk, and authentic wilderness, a stage that was both timeless   and suffused with the historical uncertainties of an emergent postapartheid order. He sought to stave off that order  and capitalize on it  by aligning himself, economically and psychologically, with the eco-archaic expectations of the Pretoria-Fort Worth axis.   
Kleinhans  s eldest son, Adolf, made an announcement to the press: We will not kill these lions that killed our father.   (In other words, the lions would not be singled out for punitive execution but would be available, as per normal, for commercial killing.) Within this family tragedy, something else emerged: through his unwitting martyrdom Kleinhans had left a legacy of killer lions. The ferocious manner of his death had cleansed his animals  and the enterprise his sons inherited  of any domestic taint. Who now would dare claim he was defrauding foreign hunters with toothless circus retirees masquerading as Wild Africa?   
Looking back at my encounter with Kleinhans on this volatile historical cusp, I am returned to Donna Haraway  s classic essay Teddy Bear Patriarchy,   in which she links, during a time of American social upheaval, Teddy Roosevelt and Carl Akeley  s hunting expeditions to censored performances (in the       eld and in museum dioramas) that betray profound racial, class, and gender anxieties. I am returned not just to her account of how anything that might complicate a narrative of individual white male hunter heroics was cropped from photographs and narratives, but also to the connection she makes between the uneasy representational arti   ce of the transnational African hunt as theatre of risk and a nation  s racial and gender panics.   
The Postapartheid Game Lodge and Ecologies of Looking   
Not long after my encounter with Kleinhans, in the newly democratic South Africa of the mid-s, the       ction writer and essayist Njabulo Ndebele visited a game lodge in his native land for the     rst time, a venture he re u64258 ects on in his essay Game Lodges and Leisure Colonialists.   Ndebele describes entering the game lodge at a dynamic moment in his society  s transformation, yet     nding himself cocooned in a temporal enclave, sealed against the environment of political change. Intent on leisure, Ndebele is haunted instead by the damning ambiguities of the black tourist.   Ndebele is not alone in writing about the leisurely stresses, the wrenching ambiguities, of the ancestrally colonized tourist vacationing in an erstwhile colony. The comparison with black travelers to the Caribbean  like Jamaica Kincaid and June Jordan  is particularly suggestive given the pervasive marketing of the islands as, like the game lodges, free- u64258 oating Edenic enclaves of natural time, unmoored from historical memory, clock-time, and the time of labor.   
The white game lodge is a classic instance of what Anne McClintock terms an anachronistic space, a space marked as noncoeval with the world around it and whose implication in modernity is suppressed. But here the spatial anachronism does not simply mark the game lodge as backward   in a progress discourse indebted to a tendentiously selective imperial enlightenment; instead, the lodge  s refusal to acknowledge the contemporary renders it an atavistic space in denial of South Africa  s democratic transformation while simultaneously capitalizing on that transformation. We can read the game lodge, then, as a manifestation of the postapartheid nation  s suddenly expansive modern tourist industry and as a racialized and naturalized fortress against that very modernity. It is into this contradictory temporal domain that Ndebele steps.   
In its antimodern dimension the lodge exists as a temporal enclave in a double, layered sense: the temporal styles evoked are both historically colonial (self-effacing servants vanishing into the bush, white camp     re camaraderie, male tales of derring-do) and eternally natural (a time outside of time, before and after the human, when megafauna rule  Kleinhans  s eternity of bush  ). Crucially, for our purposes, the game lodge locates itself in the postapartheid marketplace by selling a blended aura of colonial time and prehuman natural time.   
Ndebele arrives as a visitor from the future present, a postapartheid pioneer. As a white-collar black wildlife tourist, his arrival at the game lodge gates is a harbinger of change, an intimation that the racialized ideology of fortress conservation is pregnable. His presence is historic in an enclave from which history has been banished; he disturbs the sealed domain of white men playing games of bushveld risk, implicitly reminding them of risk in a wider form  those political transformations that may, however, come in tandem with opportunities. (Ndebele wonders whether the whites around the camp     re view him as someone with usable political connections to the ascendant black power elite.)   
In class terms, Ndebele too now belongs at the lodge. But the politics of his belonging are fraught with temporal contradictions. As an indigenous tourist from a newly arrived future, he also bears in his person reminders of the past; his presence points forward and backward in time: forward to the anticipated incursions of an excluded black majority into white nature enclaves, and backward to an ancestral history of being territorially dislodged by game lodges and other conservation projects that, while modest in relation to the country  s broader history of forced removal, nonetheless created, under the banner of wildlife conservation, dispossessed conservation refugees. Ndebele  s presence thus renders visibly political the apolitical posture of the game lodge as natural sanctuary from politics.   
We can read Ndebele  s position as that of a man who has ventured abroad in his own country, an inner   'e9migr 'e9 in a white nature industry whose marketing premise is the managed wildness of the eco-archaic. His complex pursuit of leisure in this environment  and his concomitant existential stresses  are linked to what I call the ecologies of looking, that is, the interconnected webs of looking and being seen in a context where the idea of the natural predominates. Ndebele has come to relax and look: to peer through his binoculars, alongside these other folk, at the charismatic megafauna, at the spectacles of the wild. But his own spectacular presence disrupts the smooth optics of tourism.   
By inserting himself into a tableau of neoapartheid time, amidst those he calls by turns leisure colonialists   and leisure refugees,   Ndebele makes whiteness visible. He does so by unsettling the temporal and physical insularity of the archaic game lodge, which operates as both a nostalgic, amnesiac space of white refusal of apartheid  s aftermath and a contemporary expression of postapartheid South Africa  s reintegration into global tourist networks.   
Ndebele himself, however, is also profoundly unsettled. We can read the layered self-consciousness into which he       nds himself propelled as a kind of bushveld version of Fanon  s Look, a Negro  ; that moment when, on encountering the white world, Fanon observes: I took myself far off from my own presence.It was no longer a question of being aware of my body in the third person but in a triple person.I was responsible for my body, for my race, for my ancestors.   But inside the game lodge, a black tourist like Ndebele isn  t just under observation and self-observation; he has forked out good money to be observed. As he notes sardonically, he pays to be the viewer who has to be viewed.   (It  s rhetorically apposite  a measure of Ndebele  s self-anthropologizing self-estrangement  that much of the essay is written as third-person autobiography.)   
Ndebele has long been troubled by what is sacri     ced, imaginatively, to the pressures of spectacle. In the s, amidst a brutal apartheid state of emergency, he published two controversial essays that questioned what he saw as the subservience of much South African writing to the Manichean dictates of spectacular racial violence. Those essays    The Rediscovery of the Ordinary   and Rede   ning Relevance    lamented a literary bias toward the predictable drama between ruthless oppressors and the pitiful victims,   a bias that contracted and calci    ed the imaginative range of explorable experience.   This hegemony of spectacle   seduced many writers into focusing on a predictable apartheid-antiapartheid agon that obscured a whole spectrum of ordinary experience, thereby producing a literature de    cient in complex interiority, de   cient in in u64258 ected historical awareness, and neglectful of the fabric of everyday life. Skewed by international pressures to produce a recognizable black-on-white agon, Ndebele argued, the prevailing literary imagination tended to marginalize rural black lives in communities that might never encounter a white person from one year to the next.   
I read Game Lodges and Leisure Colonialists   as an extension of Ndebele  s early preoccupation with both the spectacular costs of spectacle and the rediscovery of the ordinary. The essay asks, at least implicitly, what would it take for a black South African to enter the game lodge as an unspectacular, unwatched, ordinary tourist, thereby transforming what I  m calling the ecologies of looking? Second, how can the temporal enclave of the rural game lodge be reintegrated into a postapartheid national imaginary? Third, just as the international market for the Manichean conventions of apartheid-antiapartheid showdowns may have narrowed the South African literary spectrum, in what ways does the international tourist feedback loop of demand and satis     ed desire narrow, through repetitive reinforcement, South Africa  s viable cultures of nature? Returning to Anna Tsing  s call for reconciling the priorities of conservation biologists and political ecologists, we can recognize in Ndebele  s essay a quest to rediscover the ecological ordinary  those quotidian interactions between humans and nonhumans that move beyond the racialized theatre of the eco-archaic.   
Like the Caribbean paradise, the game reserve is shaped as a sanctuary from labor and from history  s brutality; here history  s corrugations have been Botoxed from nature  s visage. In the temporal enclaves of the island refuge ringed by ocean and in the game reserve ringed by electri     ed fences, the tourist is guaranteed full immersion in the eco-archaic, which is not to be confused with the historical. To enter this refuge is to enter a charmed space that is segregated, among other things, from the history of its own segregation.   
For black tourist-writers, from June Jordan and Jamaica Kincaid to Ndebele, this stage-managed amnesia becomes a special source of disorientation and outrage. A direct relationship emerges between a suppressed history of dispossession and the black visitor  s embattled self-possession. How is it [Ndebele asks] that a simple quest for peace and restoration turned into an unexpectedly painful journey into the self?   He       nds himself pushed into a state of simmering revolt.     
What surfaces for Ndebele, like Jordan and Kincaid before him, is a vexed relationship to labor, both historically and in the present. The violent labor histories that shaped the colonial landscapes of the Caribbean and South Africa were inseparable from forced removals, whether trans-Atlantic or internal to the white settler nation-state (via        rst the Native reserves and later the Bantustans). Given this anguished history, all these writers are angered by the labor-intensive production of labor  s illusory absence, an absence critical to the eco-archaic  s role in producing a sweat-free, soft-focus, natural tranquility that appears at once effortless and untouched by human history.   
In the touristic present, the fraught issue of labor resurfaces through the prism of class, which complicates whatever racial identi     cation the vacationing writer may feel with those who tiptoe around him or her in roles of unobtrusive service. Ndebele is plunged into anguished inner debate on how to relate to paradise  s servants: if he fraternizes with them, will his dignity be compromised in the eyes of the white tourists? How do the servants view him? How much is the correct amount to tip?   
In the Bahamas, Jordan, a Harlem-born daughter of Jamaican immigrants,       nds herself veering between, on the one hand, a gendered, racial identi    cation with local women and, on the other, a discom    ting acknowledgement that a class chasm separates her from the structurally invisible women who service her hotel room. Indeed, the most deeply characterized Bahamian woman in Jordan  s essay is the spectral Olive, the maid whose performance Jordan is urged to grade at the end of her stay in paradise without ever having met her. In thinking through her relationship to Olive  s labor, Jordan concludes that sharing a common racial adversary is an insuf    cient source of shared identity. When Kincaid revisits her natal Antigua as a naturalized American, the question of labor  past and present  renders her apoplectic. How, she exclaims, can the emancipated descendants of slaves celebrate the Hotel Training School which teaches Antiguans how to be good servants  ?   
At the heart of the history-labor-nature quandary stands the vexed issue of transport  as ancestral racial journey, as aesthetic convention, and as touristic affect. Ndebele, Jordan, and Kincaid, all shadowed by histories of forced removal,       nd themselves unable to enter, in any straightforward way, the sublime as portal to a natural   state of transport. Given their ancestral histories  and given the suppression of those histories in the temporal enclaves of eco-archaic amnesia  Ndebele, Kincaid, and Jordan all     nd themselves resistant to being unselfconsciously carried away.     
The uneasy circuits of sublime pleasure are directly related to another dilemma: What does it mean, in the fullest sense of the phrase, to be absorbed by nature? In terms of a post-Enlightenment ecology of spectatorship, how are Kincaid (an anticolonial botanical enthusiast) and Ndebele (an avid anti-apartheid bird-watcher) to circumnavigate the repressive legacy of racial classi     cation that     gured their ancestors as natural  ? White nature tourists, I would suggest, have less troubled access to sublime natural absorption in a post- or neocolonial environment because they can experience their whiteness as an unselfconsciously unclassi   ed state. Ndebele, by contrast, is painfully alive to the problematics of natural union and a historically freighted politics of looking: [W]hen [black tourists] go game viewing, it is dif   cult not to feel that, in the total scheme of things, perhaps they should be out there with the animals, being viewed.     
The presence of these animals is critical. In the tourist cultures of the Caribbean, Eden typically       gures as a garden  a sanctuary from history and labor, but a sanctuary without predation. By contrast, the African Edens of the southern and East African tourist industries are shaped around the presence  and managed threat  of charismatic megafauna, which becomes the primary guarantor of encounters with the timeless and the pristine. This has profound gender implications: the African Eden must be scoured not only of history and labor but also (as we  ve seen in the case of Wolwekloof) of the taint of domesticity, the stigma of the tame. As a result, the cultural spectacle around African Edens has a strongly masculine tilt: the white game guides, the black trackers, the bush pilots all carry forward  adapted for the contemporary global marketplace  a neo-Victorian obsession with risk (or at least with saleable performances of risk  s illusions).   
Stranger in the Village   
James Baldwin  s Stranger in the Village   may seem an unlikely text to enfold into an analysis of game reserves, racialized tourism, and environmental time. Yet in light of the discussion of Kleinhans and Ndebele, we can glean from Baldwin  s classic essay productive insights into racialized ecologies of looking and the role that cultures of nature play in modernity  s civilizational power plays. Some forty years before Ndebele arrived as a solitary, improbable novelty at the game lodge gates, Baldwin spent the       rst of several sojourns in a Swiss Alpine village that he portrayed as a white wilderness.   He had been forewarned that he would probably be a  sight   for the village,   and his essay offers a far-reaching meditation on invisible visibility, on how it feels  and what it means culturally  to be a sight   unseen. Baldwin, like Ndebele after him, is thrust by the stresses of racialized leisure into a state of spectacular self-consciousness.   
Baldwin  s anger and insight     u64258 ow from his experience of what one might call empowered parochialism. The Swiss villagers have never encountered a black person before; they lead untraveled lives, holed up in their icy redoubt, severed from the larger world. Yet Baldwin recognizes these hyperparochial people are powerfully connected in their severance, unconsciously emboldened by the broad currents of Western culture  Dante, Michelangelo, the cathedral at Chartres  that afford them an assumed racial superiority and ease.   
What makes Baldwin  s essay so suggestive in tandem with Ndebele  s is the acuity with which both writers expose the profound resistance  local, national, international  to the temporal and geographical incorporation of blackness into modernity. Baldwin is treated in the village as a suspect latecomer  ; despite his experiential cosmopolitanism he is made to feel more tangential to the vast temporal and spatial     u64258 ows of Western culture than the most illiterate, cut off Swiss villager.   
Unlike Baldwin in blindingly white rural Switzerland, Ndebele doesn  t have to travel far  just assume the mantle of local time traveler  in order to be exoticized as an oddity in a blindingly white South African rural enclave. If Ndebele too remains, for now, alone and improbable, he is writing decades later than Baldwin, on a very different historical cusp. Yet, when Ndebele exclaims that the entire world of contemporary tourism carries no intuitive familiarity   for him, we sense a kindred indignation to Baldwin  s anger at the energy it takes to stake out for himself a space in a modernity organized around his anachronistic yet constitutive exclusion. The challenge Ndebele faces is to reclaim  and ultimately reimagine  the game lodge  s overdetermined modern nature, a modern nature in denial of its modernity. Ndebele  s insights can be read as supplementing Baldwin  s in this essential way: it is not only the architectural, literary, artistic, and musical cultures of the West that have historically been wielded as weapons of black exclusion (largely through denied coevalness and denied hybridity), but the cultures of nature as well, including the culture of wildlife tourism, whereby a provincial whiteness is forti     ed by white pilgrims from abroad. The game lodge becomes, then, a site of provincial cosmopolitanism,   to adapt Amitava Kumar  s phrase.  Thus Wild Africa, while purporting to represent civilization  s antithesis, simultaneously freights whiteness with another kind of cathedral ballast.   
Both Baldwin  s and Ndebele  s white wilderness   essays assail a diehard, historically dominant culture  s determination to keep living in denial, to sustain an unsustainable condition of contorted innocence. For the Europe of the s, black people  over there in the colonies  could remain at an abstract remove: [I]n effect,   Baldwin notes, the black man, as a man, did not exist for Europe.   American whites of that era, he adds, proved even greater contortionists, still nourish[ing] the illusion that there is some means of recovering the European innocence, of returning to a state in which black men do not exist.   The postapartheid South African game lodge  as sanctuary of illusory innocence and eco-archaic return  depends on an even less plausible theatre of denial, given the accession of the black majority to political power. Buoyed by performances of ecological elegy and arrested time, the game lodge serves as the last great hope of a monochromatic nostalgia that wishes away the cultural, economic, and political transformations of the society in which it is embedded. If, in Baldwin  s closing assertion in his  essay, [t]his world is white no longer, and will never be white again,   how much more decisively his voice echoes four decades later in a nation where a black majority, for the        rst time in world history, had voted a white supremacist regime out of of    ce.   
From Leisure Refugees to the Ultimate Safari   
Nadine Gordimer  s short story The Ultimate Safari   follows a group of refugees from Mozambique  s civil war on a fugitive, perilous trek across South Africa  s largest and most celebrated wildlife preserve, the Kruger National Park. The story centers on the experiences of traumatized cross-border travelers at the furthest remove from Ndebele  s leisure refugees   and Kleinhans  s foreign tourists craving their eternity of bush.   Inside the Kruger Park, the Mozambican refugees       nd themselves plunged, unguided, into a time outside of time, into a bewildering, life-threatening timelessness from which, if they are to survive, they must extricate themselves. The Ultimate Safari   carries forward my concern with rival ecologies of time, with the politics of mobility, and with the racialized politics of looking.   
Gordimer has a penchant for ironizing tourist industry boilerplate in the titles of her stories, for instance, calling her most brilliant expos 'e9 of a racist consciousness Good Climate, Friendly Inhabitants.   The Ultimate Safari   bears as its epigraph an advertising pitch that appeared in a British newspaper: The African Adventure Lives OnYou can do it! The ultimate safari or expedition with leaders who know Africa.   Gordimer  s story pivots on the ambiguity of ultimate,   which can imply either nonpareil   or       nal.   The tourist-ad safari is pitched as unbeatable, the adventure of a lifetime, while her     ctional refugees   safari, which trades the frying pan of the Mozambican civil war for the     re of foreign human and animal threat, risks becoming terminally ultimate.   
The Kruger Park, over eighty years old and roughly the size of Israel, stretches for  miles along South Africa  s eastern perimeter with Mozambique. This megafauna-rich game park is symbolically central to South Africa  s conservation history, wilderness mythology, and tourist industry. Yet it is also multiply liminal, serving during the Mozambican civil war that lasted from  until  as an overdetermined border zone: between a Marxist postcolonial state and its anticommunist apartheid neighbor, between black majority rule and white minority supremacy, between the cultures of tourist leisure and migrant labor, and between the animal and the human. This liminal overdetermination has a profound temporal dimension as well, bringing into frictional proximity animal time, tourist time, refugee time, the spiritualized time of white supremacy, and revolutionary utopian time, all represented as noncoeval on this particular cusp of modernity. If Yellowstone were located at Nogales or El Paso, it would loosely approximate the convergence of charismatic megafauna, tourist leisure, cross-border desperation, militarization, and clandestine     u64258 ight that have crisscrossed Kruger  s history.   
The Kruger Park of Gordimer  s story  especially when read alongside her little-known essay on the park as frontier  takes shape as a place of contrasting visible and ghosted movements of animal herds, herds of tourists, civil war refugees, conservation refugees, and migrant laborers shuttling back and forth between Mozambique and the South African gold mines. By selecting as her narrator a ten-year-old refugee, Gordimer grants her story a potent affective energy and intimacy. But the little girl  s perspective is necessarily limited in its grasp of the broader political implications of the journey, which we can productively situate in the ideological history of Kruger Park, a history that dramatizes the complicity between the rise of a white supremacist capitalism and an eco-archaic bushveld aesthetic.   
Almost a century ago, the Transvaal legislature banned blacks from owning guns and hunting dogs, transforming game, notes Jane Carruthers, from an economic resource available to everyone, to a commodity reserved for the ruling white group.   This ban  in the name of conservation  compounded the multipronged squeeze on rural African subsistence living, rendering it increasingly precarious. In the dominant colonial conservationist mythology, the nineteenth-century decimation of game resulted primarily from the cruel, uncontrolled slaughter of wildlife by rural Africans, whereas historically the prime culprit in that butchery was an imported European ethos of killing as an ennobling sport, an ethos that, backed by advanced weaponry that Africans lacked, severed hunting from the need for protein and hide clothing and the need to safeguard crops, herds, and     u64258  ocks from animal predation. The racially skewed hunting laws had a malign impact on African nutrition, subsistence livelihoods, and food security. Together with the creation of national parks like Kruger and (to a far greater extent) the creation of congested native reserves and the imposition of taxes, such laws drove more and more blacks into the capitalist economies of the mines and white agriculture. The racialized discourse of wildlife scarcity (mapped in temporal terms as an ethical difference between backward   and advanced   peoples) was thus profoundly entwined with the discourse of labor scarcity in a rapidly modernizing economy.   
The colonial rescripting of wildlife scarcity as a black problem  which helped rationalize the early twentieth-century creation of national parks   depended on demonizing blacks as barbarous poachers whose relationship to wildlife was one of illegality and threat while depending, conversely, on mythologizing whites as stewards of nature whose conservationist principles evidenced a wider civilizational superiority. This explosive history of land theft and unequal access to wildlife as resource (whether for hunting or, later, tourist revenue) helped harden stereotypes of the white conservationist and the black poacher that continue to hamper environmental efforts today, with many black South Africans still viewing wildlife as rivals for water, food, and grazing land.   
South Africa  s game reserves are thus historically ensnarled in a tangle of elegiac narratives around vanishing wildlife, vanishing land, vanishing livelihoods, and vanishing labor. Neither the game reserve nor the native reserve was represented as coeval with South Africa  s white, mining-driven modernity, yet both were products of that modernization: the game reserve as a hypervisible space of ancient   wildness administered for touristic consumption, the native reserve as an anachronistic space structured around invisibility, where crowded human suffering and attendant ecological calamity were concentrated in out of the way   places. In terms of a national progress narrative, the mutually constitutive discourses of racial and natural purity were mapped onto both game reserves and native reserves. Game reserves were represented as positively archaic  unimproved places where whites could venture for spiritual renewal  whereas native reserves were negatively archaic, places set aside for the uncivilized.   
As Jane Carruthers observes in her superb history of Kruger Park, the white nationalist regime, confronted with international condemnation when apartheid was imposed in,invoked its caring conservationist ethos  with Kruger Park as primary showpiece  as evidence that South Africa belonged to the community of civilized nations. Carruthers  s most astute insight is her recognition that during the s and s, before the ascent of international tourism to South Africa, the idea of the national park helped foster a unifying ideology of white nationalism between historically antagonistic English and Afrikaans South Africans. That ideology drew on two quite discrete, mutually distrustful traditions: British colonial conservation and the Afrikaner mythology of themselves as a chosen people in a God-given land. Post-, a trip to the Kruger National Park could be promoted as a spiritual pilgrimage for both Afrikaner and English whites, as in the words of National Parks Board public relations director,   
Rj. Labuschagne:   
Exalted personages of the past have ever     u64258 ed to nature for meditation and solitude: Christ climbed the Mount of OlivesSolomon repeatedly exhorts mankind to return to nature; President Kruger [of the Transvaal Republic] spent three days on the Magaliesberg in silent meditationIt is for this reason that the [white] South African nation undertakes the yearly pilgrimage to the Kruger National Park.   
Here Labuschagne deploys, in the service of white unity, the well-established colonial trope of the topographically and socially elevated white male communing in solitude as the monarch of all he surveys. But he also mobilizes the religious archaic  the images of Christ and Solomon  to advance a racially exclusive touristic modernity. We witness here a paradoxically archaic modernity that exhorts white tourists to return   to nature as a patriotic exercise, an individually and collectively elevating pilgrimage of renewal which is routed both through a Christianized antiquity and through a racially exclusive romantic sublime.   
In the late s, when Mozambique was gripped by civil war and South Africa by antiapartheid uprisings, Gordimer visited the frontier zone formed by southern Mozambique, Kruger Park, and the neighboring Bantustan of Gazankulu. In an astutely materialist account of her untouristic explorations, she reads that frontier wilderness as a cultural space shaped by land wars, militarization, and migrant labor. Since the late nineteenth century, Mozambique has remained the primary foreign labor reserve for South Africa  s mines. At the northern end of Kruger Park, a giant baobab tree served for decades as the primary recruiting station for tens of thousands of Mozambican men who were certi     ed, dipped in disinfectant, and carted off to the mines. At this site the cultures of labor, militarism, tourism, and nature converged and interpenetrated: Although it is within the Kruger Park,   writes Gordimer,   
the road leading to the TEBA [the Employment Bureau of Africa] site is barred, like the many roads which now lead to concealed military camps rather than viewpoints for observing the animals. Nevertheless, I got there, passing buck and warthog along deserted tracks. High up overlooking the convergence of the three frontiers was a scene out of Conrad: buried in tropical trees, low buildings where men were received, fed, medically examined, signed up and transported;a dark-browed thatched mansion surrounded by a moat of huge-leaved plants, with a magni      cent wild     g tree thrust, like a tower, through the structure.   
To this complex ecology of spectatorship we must add another invisible layer. When this northern region was incorporated into the Kruger Park in the s, the Tsonga-speaking Makuleke were driven from their land. Some of these conservation refugees ended up, after decades of resistance, in the Shangaan-Tsonga ethnic homeland   of Gazankulu, others     u64258 ed to Mozambique. By the late s and s, a reverse border-crossing was underway; this time the Shangaan were in   u64258 ight not from conservation violence in South Africa but from South African-fomented military violence in Mozambique. By the late s, refugees were streaming into Gazankulu at the rate of,a month. To get there, most had to breach     rst the Kruger Park  s ,-volt electric fence, then a backup razor-coiled fence, and then the park itself. In short, this timeless   place has been repeatedly crisscrossed by the convulsive movements of desperate humans historically uprooted from their land, whether by conservation, war, or the ethnic engineering of the Bantustans.   
It is one such convulsive movement that Gordimer imagines in The Ultimate Safari,   which we can read as a       ctional companion piece to the sociopolitical frontier essay she published fourteen years earlier. The unnamed ten-year-old war orphan who recounts her group  s via dolorosa across the Kruger Park tells a story that becomes, among other things, about tourism without tourists, the perspectival antithesis of Kleinhans  s Zulu   village without villagers. If Ndebele  s essay focuses on the dilemmas of the hypervisible black middle-class tourist encircled by a white nature industry, Gordimer  s story dramatizes the fears of ultra-poor Africans whose lives depend on passing unseen through the white nature industry  s commercialized zone of animals.   
The girl  s journey through time, megafauna, and the bush stands in blunt contrast to the pilgrimage toward a spiritually regenerative white race-time promulgated by Labuschagne and his ilk. To get there,   she recalls,   
we had to go through the Kruger Park. We knew about the Kruger Park. A kind of whole country of animals  elephants, lions, jackals, hyenas, hippos, crocodiles, all kinds of animals. We had some of them in our own country, before the war (our grandfather remembers; we children weren  t born yet) but the bandits kill the elephants and sell their tusks, and the bandits and our soldiers have eaten all the buck. There was a man in our village without legs  a crocodile took them off, in our river; but all the same our country is a country of people, not animals. We knew about the Kruger Park because some of our men used to leave home to work there in the places where white people come to stay and look at the animals.   
The girl  s great trek from her lost country of people   to the whole country of animals   gathers force from a potent, if implicit, contrast with the journey the tourists have undertaken. In the country of animals that the girl is entering, humans remain unseen: the story alludes to the tourists who exist only as voices and cooking smells wafting through the animal night from the far side of the rest camp fence. Though constituted by the same modernity, these two contiguous groups live trespass, risk, and animal time in radically different modalities.   
As I have argued, white tourists purchase the frisson of trespass into a timeless   animal zone, a memorable, risk-simulating adventure in an ecoarchaic world liberated from history. However, those other foreigners, thrust into the whole country of animals   by history  s convulsions, seek to survive risk and trespass by laboring to remain invisible in the historical present, by passing through the elephant grass undetected (by game wardens, border police, lions), by moving like animals among the animals, away from the roads, away from the white people  s camps.   If the Kruger Park is pitched to tourists as an opportunity to get close   to wildlife, for the refugees human-animal intimacy depends on a deeper kind of interspecies recognition. The girl and her fellow travelers, in their transnational trespass, have also crossed over into the border zone of the human animal  where knowledge gleaned from other species can offer lifesaving pointers to where water and food are and how to achieve a deeper camou   u64258 age, a safer invisibility.   
As they traverse this border zone, the tourist and the refugee exist in different states of transport. The Kruger Park promises the tourist the excitement of a safely managed plunge into the deep time, the eco-archaic, of the purely animal. (Suspense typically hinges on seeing or not seeing one of the Big Five  lion, elephant, rhino, leopard, and buffalo  that have proven indispensable to the branding of South African tourism.) The refugee  s temporal experience, however, is quite different: the perilous passage through a time zone dedicated to tourists and animals doubles as a portal, not into a suspended past, but into a suspended future. These two groups of transients from opposite ends of the spectrum of voluntary and involuntary mobility pass each other like ships in the night, freighted with radically different hopes, radically different experiences of national park space-time, and radically different visions of what constitutes escape.   
On their ultimate safari, the Mozambicans   collective egress represents a history-driven descent into timelessness, though one quite remote from the fenced, managed timelessness of the tourist domain. When right-wing bandits scorched their Mozambican village church and schools, the girl and her siblings began to lose their footing in the institutional rhythms of calendrical time. Thereafter, as they     u64258 ee through the country of animals,   the days lose their names and traction; the old, structured rhythms of a now-destroyed village time give way to an improvised survival dependent on reading sun, sky, and animal behavior.   
The Mozambicans, their known world razed by civil war, are not so much moving toward as moving away. Away   becomes the story  s signature word: We wanted to go where there were no bandits and there was food. We were glad to think there must be such a place; away,   the girl declares, we started to go away, again.   When they       nally reach a refugee camp beyond the park, she fantasizes about living in a real house again, with no war, no away.     
Away: between the lines the reader       lls in the complexities of that abrupt, complex word, connecting it to a double discourse of escape that exposes the chasm between the tourist-ad  s promotional blurb and the little girl  s voice. Away: as in getaway, sanctuary, refuge, retreat, terms that take on diametrically opposed valences depending on whether leisure or terror is the propulsive force, depending on whether you  re in temporary   u64258 ight from your white-collar workweek or intent on the hard labor of   u64258 ight through electri   ed fences into a time that has lost all shape.   
Having survived the wildlife reserve, the girl       nds sanctuary in a refugee camp that we can assume (extrapolating from hints in Gordimer  s short story and her essay) is located in the Gazankulu Bantustan. By story  s end the girl has been living there for over two years, in a vast, overcrowded tent that rises in implicit counterpoint to the tented rest camps of the leisure colonialists. The refugees have thus exchanged the suspended time of transit through the national park for the suspended time of the refugee camp, a provisional place that, within the symbolic economy of the story, can never quite serve as resolution or destination.   
Gloria Anzaldua has famously observed that   
borders are set up to de     ne the places that are safe and unsafe, to distinguish us from them. A border is a dividing line, a narrow strip along a steep edge. A borderland is a vague and undetermined place created by the emotional residue of an unnatural boundary. It is in a constant state of transition. The prohibited and the forbidden are its inhabitantsthose who cross over, pass over, or go through the con   nes of the normal.   
When, I would add, that unnatural boundary   is marked by a national park that embodies a national culture of nature, the borderland can become a site   
of redoubled violence in its militarized severance of natural from unnatural and native from foreign.   
This       erce severance pertains powerfully to the Shangaan, the trans-frontier people to whom Gordimer  s narrator clearly belongs. On entering the refugee camp in the Bantustan, the girl   
was surprised to       nd they speak our language; our grandmother told me.Long ago, in the time of our fathers, there was no fence that kills you, there was no Kruger Park between them and us, we were the same people under our own king, right from our village we left to this place we  ve come to.   
The refugees   journey thus retraces a continuity that persists only in the unfenced past of oral memory, before this threshold people was culturally and territorially severed,       rst, by the map separating Portuguese colony from Boer Republic, and later by conservation  s electri   ed fence that delimited the beginning of South Africa  s national and national-nature space. The Shangaan were left straddling the divide.   
As a transfrontier people  who can be capriciously designated by South Africans as either us   or them    the Shangaan have suffered from new forms of vulnerability in recent years, becoming targets of brutal assaults and expulsions. During the wave of xenophobic killings and shack burnings that swept through the shantytowns of Johannesburg and other South African cities in,Shangaan, both South African and Mozambican, were targeted as foreigners,   who (in the all-too-familiar-scapegoating) were deemed criminal elements   who come over here   to steal our jobs, our women, our shacks, our things.   
This often violently enforced postapartheid discrimination between the authentically   national and the undesirable foreign is ironically waived when it comes to the commodi     ed performances of memory and amnesia on which the tourist industry depends. The carved wooden animals, the soapstone sculptures, and the masks that American, European, and Japanese tourists carry home as authenticating mementoes of their South African game-park trip overwhelmingly derive from beyond South Africa  s borders, especially from Mozambique and Zimbabwe, but also from Ghana, Congo, Senegal, Nigeria, and Cameroon. Immigrants who risk everything crossing borders, fences, national parks, and hostile communities may be branded as undesirable others in their persons, yet play an indispensable role in the circuits of desire of the international tourist feedback loop. For it is these artists and vendors from away   who serve as the primary purveyors of an ersatz indigeneity through the rebranding of their artifacts as South African   memorabilia. The carved elephants, lions, hippos, and other charismatic megafauna they sell in the condensed form of the commodity icon authenticate the tourist  s ultimate safari   into the eco-archaic.   
International Recolonization?   
Whether the space of the game reserve can be repossessed, imaginatively and experientially, will depend on at least four critical factors. First, how will the reserves be impacted by government policies toward land restitution? Second, what role will the ascent of black tourism play in reshaping South Africa  s nature industry? Will game reserves become alluring destinations to black tourists or remain alienating reminders of racial entitlement, dispossession, and apartheid atavism? Third, how sustainable will rural ecotourism initiatives prove? Will they offer broad-based economic opportunities and draw on cultures of nature outside the purview of neocolonial conservation? Finally, how will international forces  the feedback loops of global tourism and the pressures exerted by European and American-based conservationist NGOs  shape South Africa  s environmental priorities?   
Hector Magome and James Murombedzi, two incisive analysts of these policy dilemmas, have expressed a profound skepticism toward the international role: If the dominant agenda is conventional biodiversity conservation, the political expediency that facilitates the decolonization of nature at the national level will cause its re-colonization at the international level.   This remains a real, active risk. That said, however, the primary driver behind the South African conservation systems, both state-run and private, has tended to be the lucrative, easy sell of spectacular megafauna rather than biodiversity. The latter, from a tourist perspective, is often unspectacular and therefore boring.   As Kleinhans  s alfalfa problem suggests, for many foreign tourists, mixed-usage landscapes (which blend agriculture, subsistence, and conservation) are anathema, unappealing as spectacle and insuf     ciently severed from the domestic and the familiar. Yet, for all the complexities that the coexistence of pastoralists, agriculturalists, and wildlife entails, such hybrid uses of land can play an essential part in the long run to help dissolve the resilient, Manichean perception of blacks as poachers (or encroachers) and white environmentalists as humane toward animals but inhumane toward people. Amidst the land squeeze, increased mixed usage will be a necessary component of efforts to reconcile water, food, and ecosystem security for humans and nonhuman life-forms. The alternative is unsustainable: powerhouse international NGOs in cahoots with stereotypical tourist demands for Wild Africa driving subsistence farmers and ecosystem people off the land.   
In its unevenly postapartheid mode, South Africa has to contend with the civilizational clout of powerful national and international ideologies of nature. These are potentially mutable ideologies, to be sure, but nonetheless etched into the nation  s physical, psychic, and economic landscapes. These lingering legacies of political subjugation and territorial appropriation (buttressed by the civilizational discriminations of colonial progress narratives) have been used to rationalize unequal access to land, wildlife, and leisure while erecting a vast international marketplace around charismatic megafauana and the eco-archaic. What is acutely at stake in understanding South Africa  s environmental dilemmas is that they point, in critical form, toward more generalized global crises around land access, food security, resource wars, biodiversity, tourism, and the place of amnesia in the racial politics of the international wildlife marketplace.   
In our quest to transform colonialism  s temporal and spatial legacies, a profound tension often arises between economic, historical, and psychological impulses. How much change, how fast, at what cost to whom, and when? The strategic answers will vary according to the speci     c frictions or collaborations between global forces, local and national power structures, and what Tsing calls the sticky materiality of practical encounters.   Let Ndebele, surveying the game lodge, have the     nal word: The ambiguities and choices are dif   cult, even painful. Now we want to throw off the psychological burden of our painful past; now we want to hold on to it.We think: there is no peace for those caught in the process of becoming.     
   
 
Ecologies of the Aftermath   
Precision Warfare and Slow Violence   
The war has used up words; they have been weakened, they have deteriorated like motor car tires;we are now confronted with a depreciation of all our termsthat may well make us wonder what ghosts will be left to walk.   
  Henry James in interview, March,   
One day my Sunday School teacher, Mrs. Graff, read the Noah  s Ark story aloud to our class. When she came to the part about the     u64258 oodwaters drying up, she held the book open to the picture of the sturdy, gleaming ark surrounded after the   u64258 ood by the lush green trees and colorful plants, all under the beautiful rainbow in the sky.   
The entire class was entranced except for Joel, the boy sitting beside me.   
Joel stared at the picture our teacher held up and yelled suddenly.   
  WHERE ARE ALL THE BODIES?!?     
Our teacher looked puzzled and annoyed. She put her book down.   
  WHAT BODIES, JOEL?     
  THE BODIES!   he cried. WHERE ARE ALL THE BODIES OF THE PEOPLE AND THE ANIMALS THAT DIED IN THE FLOOD?!?     
  Ellen O  Grady, Outside the Ark: An Artist  s Journey in Occupied Palestine   
What is a war casualty? The answer appears painfully obvious. It asserts itself less through argument than through visceral photographs: a torso shredded by a roadside bomb; a bloodied peasant spreadeagled in a ditch; a soldier, cigarette dangling nonchalantly, crashing his boot into a dead woman  s head. Yet such images account only for immediate, visually arresting fatalities. What about those casualties that don  t        t the photographic stereotypes, casualties that occur long after major combat has been concluded, casualties whose belatedness and dispersal make them resistant to dramatic packaging? The media, in thrall to speed and spectacle, lacks the attention span to follow war-in u64258 icted catastrophes that take years or generations to exact their toll. After of   cial victory has been declared, how do we track the persistence of unof   cial hostilities in the cellular domain, the untidy, attritional lethality that moves through the tissue, blood, and bones of combatants and noncombatants alike, moving through as well the living body of the land itself?   
As Joel  s disquiet over the shiny, rainbow version of Noah  s rescue narrative suggests, stories  tightly framed for time, space, and point of view   are convenient places for concealing bodies. Stories of the aftermath are protracted, convoluted, messy, open ended, and often discomforting to tell, particularly when  whether it  s Noah  s ark or the  Gulf War  the of      cial narrative frame is unequivocally triumphalist. The Gulf War offers a dramatic instance of how challenging it can be to narrate the ecology of the aftermath because America  s corporate media represented that war as a spectacular achievement of speed and untainted victory  a strategically, technologically, and ethically decisive war, the nation  s anti-Vietnam. Yet the Gulf War was, at the same time, the con u64258 ict that gave us Gulf War syndrome and  less remarked upon  the     rst con u64258 ict in which depleted uranium munitions were deployed on a large scale. It was thus a war of profound narrative contrasts: between the crisp story line that marches briskly toward victory and the diffuse, laborious story about slow violence, about convoluted scienti   c proof and the politics of risk, a story that fans out into the open-ended, uncertain ecologies of the aftermath.   
Public debate is overdue on war  s hidden human and environmental costs, a debate that acknowledges major shifts in the ways that contemporary wars kill. Military euphemisms like precision   warfare, surgical   strikes, smart   wars, depleted   uranium, and miracle drones   have helped legitimize recent high-tech con   u64258 icts while concealing their longterm toxic and radiological impact. The rhetoric of precision lulls us into regarding the fatalities of war as swift, immediate killings. But ironically, the increasing reliance of American and British forces on the discourse of precision   coincides with the integration of depleted   uranium into their missiles, bullets, and tank armor.   
Ever since the  Gulf War, a new kind of fatal environmental imprecision has been built into precision   warfare, for that war was history  s       rst depleted-uranium con u64258  ict. Arguably, not since Hiroshima and Nagasaki have humans unleashed a military substance so tenaciously hostile to life itself. Depleted uranium (DU) possesses a durability beyond our comprehension: it had a radioactive half-life of. billion years. When it enters the environment, DU effectively does so for all time, with consequences that are resistant to military metrics, consequences that we are incompetent to judge.   
In our age of depleted-uranium warfare, we have an ethical obligation to challenge the military body counts that consistently underestimate (in advance and in retrospect) the true toll of waging high-tech wars. Who is counting the staggered deaths that civilians and soldiers suffer from depleted uranium ingested or blown across the desert? Who is counting the belated fatalities from unexploded cluster bombs that lie in wait for months or years, metastasizing into landmines? Who is counting deaths from chemical residues left behind by so-called pinpoint bombing, residues that turn into foreign insurgents, in     ltrating native rivers and poisoning the food chain? Who is counting the victims of genetic deterioration  the stillborn, malformed infants conceived by parents whose DNA has been scrambled by war  s toxins? The calculus of any con u64258 ict needs to at least acknowledge such environmental casualties, even if they cannot be quanti   ed. Such casualties may suffer slow, invisible deaths that don  t     t the news cycle at CNN or Fox, but they are war casualties nonetheless.   
Fractal Wars and Surgical Tropes   
The  Gulf War is widely acknowledged as a benchmark moment in the representation and experience of war. It was, in Paul Virilio  s in   u64258  uential formulation, the     rst fractal war  :   
With modern techniques and new logistics of perception, the battle     eld of the Gulf War also developed within the     eld of perception. It appeared to be a local war, in the sense that its battle   eld was very small compared with the Second World War. However, considering its representation, it was a worldwide war.So, on one hand, there was a local war of small interest, with very little human loss on one side, with very little consequences, but on the other hand, there was a unique     eld of perception operating. Unlike the Vietnam War, it was a worldwide war, live, with all the special effects of course, the data processing supervised by the Pentagon.So, yes, this war happened, more on a screen than on the ground. It happened more on the TV screen than in the reality of the battle   eld. To that extent, one can say that real time defeated real space. (my emphases)   
What appeared so novel about this war was its aura  its manipulated aura  of virtual immediacy. Here was a real-time   war conducted and viewed at high speed in the present tense, a smart   war projected through myriad networks onto linked screens in the bomber  s cockpit, on TV, and the Internet, giving the potent sensation of instant access and total, continuous immersion. Perceptually, the Gulf War was high de      nition, yet epistemologically it was blurry, suggesting a radically new turn in what James Der Derian has dubbed the military-industrial-media-entertainment network.     
Yet commentators on the Gulf War, whether technophile or technophobe, whether dazzled or appalled, have consistently represented it as a war of speed, brief in historical time and instantly available (though through complex mediations) as spectacle. Virilio, for example, glosses over the war on the ground as inconsequential, local, and quick; the war  s only long-term signi     cance derives from its impact on the logistics of the perceptual battle.   eld. However, this critical     xation with the ethics of the war  s potent technological innovations has overshadowed inquiries into the environmental and epidemiological ethics of its duration. A preoccupation with the paradoxes of the Gulf War  s mediated immediacy has made this a particularly challenging war to represent in terms of the longue dur 'e9e of the ecological aftermath.   
We can give this dif     culty the traction of story by embarking on a road trip in the company of two very different guides who ventured independently down the same paved two-lane transnational highway in the same week early in March. The highway stretches north from Kuwait City through the border town of Safwan and from there on to Basra, Iraq  s primary port. Both our guides traveled that road to Basra soon after American bombers had incinerated retreating Iraqi convoys in what became known as the turkey shoot   on the Highway of Death.   
Our       rst guide is writer Michael Kelly, whose award-winning Martyr  s Day: Chronicle of a Small War () has won acclaim as the     nest work of American war literature since Michael Herr  s Dispatches and has been hailed (alongside Anthony Swofford  s Jarhead) as the literary masterpiece of the     rst Gulf War. Kelly, a former editor of the New Republic and National Journal who would go on to edit the Atlantic Monthly, offers a visceral account in Martyr  s Day of the charred bodies and tanks strewn along the Highway of Death. As a reporter, he observes this spectacle of carnage with something bordering on relief:   
The Gulf War was an experience disconnected from itself, conducted with such speed and at such distances and with so few witnesses that it was, even for many of the people involved, an abstraction. It was dif     cult for the Americans, who had done their killing almost entirely from afar, to feel a connection with those they killed, or with the act of killing.   
Kelly belongs to the camp of Gulf War commentators who suffered from pixilation fatigue; af   u64258 icted by the vertigo of the virtual, he was disturbed by the war  s fusion of video game presence with corporeal absence, its mixture of closeness and distance that made it feel both instant and elusive even, he suggests, to the killers themselves.   
Traveling the Highway of Death, Kelly       nally comes eye to eye with the intimate, bodily certainties of war. He has stepped outside the infosphere and into a carnal space where war residues penetrate the nostrils and coat the skin. For miles and miles,   he observes, the roads were rich with the physical realities of war, glutted with the evidence of slaughter and victory. They became the great circuit board of the Gulf War, where the disconnectedness stopped.     
From Kelly  s vantage point, then, the Highway of Death marks the end of the road. This is the terminus he has been craving, a place of convergent       nalities, where the war has exacted its last fatalities, where certain victory has been achieved, and where the feedback loop of bloodless mediation has been trumped by the raw materiality of a corpse-strewn highway. Here,     nally, he can slough off the deranging enchantments of the virtual and, standing on the carnal terra     rma of American triumph,     nd the empirical, experiential, and narrative closure he has yearned for.   
Our second guide, traveling down that same road that very week, is a woman named Carol Picou, who ventured there in a very different capacity. First Sgt. Picou was serving as a combat support Army nurse working with a mobile hospital unit. A seventeen-year veteran of the Us. military, she helped open a       eld hospital alongside the highway and for      fteen grueling days treated the injured and retrieved the Iraqi and Bedouin dead, clambering in out of those same incinerated tanks that for Kelly marked his sense of an ending. Within days of her departure from this scene, Picou  s skin starting to erupt in black spots; soon she lost control of her bladder and her bowels. She came to depend permanently on a catheter and diapers. After her return to America, over the months and years that followed, she developed thyroid problems and squamous cancer cells in her uterus; she developed immunological dysfunction and encephalopathy. Three years after her stint on the Highway of Death, tests found dangerously elevated levels of uranium in her urine. Not until a barrage of af u64258 ictions had jeopardized her life did Picou     rst heard the phrase depleted uranium   and begin to learn of the threat its residues could pose.   
  Depleted   is a lulling word: place it in front of robust nouns like energy   or ambition,   and depleted   saps them of their vigor. Not so depleted uranium. It poses a terrible radioactive and chemical threat that actively endangers soldiers, civilians, and the environment itself. Despite that reassuring depleted   in its name, depleted uranium possesses  percent of natural uranium  s radioactivity. During the Gulf War alone, American troops       red weapons containing  tons of depleted uranium. According to British professor of medicinal chemistry Dr. Malcolm Hooper, this contributed signi   cantly to making the Gulf War the most toxic war in Western military history.   In Hooper  s measured opinion, depleted uranium is a new weapon for indiscriminate, mutually-assured destruction.   The United Nations Commission on Human Rights, moreover, has classi   ed depleted uranium munitions with nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons as weapons of indiscriminate effect.   Although German scientists     rst researched DU  s military potential in the s, for a half century it was kept off the battle   eld. Not until the  Gulf War was depleted uranium integrated into conventional warfare, thereby adding a new fatal kind of environmental imprecision to precision   warfare. How did such an unethical radioactive substance become enfolded, from the Gulf War onward, into the landscape of modern warfare and into the ecology of war  s aftermath?   
Why, Carol Picou asked, had she and her unit not been warned of depleted uranium  s potential radiological and chemical perils before entering those heavily polluted battle zones? Why had the Us. military not out     tted them with protective gear, these nurses on their mercy mission, working inside and alongside tanks incinerated by depleted uranium-tipped munitions? In retrospect, Picou worried about the     erce desert winds that her unit had encountered while tending to the injured, winds that had whipped up the desert dust and with it, unbeknownst to her, suspended depleted uranium particles.   
Picou  s unit included  troops. Of those,  worked along the front line on the Highway of Death; the other  remained in the rear. By,     ve years after the Gulf War  s of   cial end, of the  members of Picou  s unit who worked on the Highway of Death forty were seriously ill and six had died. By contrast, the  who had stayed back from the front line had remained healthy. On learning that some returning veterans had started to father or conceive children missing an eye or an ear or a thyroid gland, that children were being born with   u64258 ippers instead of arms, Picou, who had done so much to heal war  s casualties, decided to have her tubes tied.   
The Department of Defense discharged Carol Picou in March,      ve years after her return from the Highway of Death. She was dismissed with Bowel and Bladder Incontinence  Etiology Unknown.   According to the document that terminated her service, the barrage of illnesses she suffered from was non-combat-related.   She was thus denied the kind of pension that servicewomen and men injured in the battle   eld secured. Her decisive dismissal on the basis of a medically indecisive narrative further undermined Picou  s physical and     nancial prospects. Beneath the camou u64258  age of slow violence, and despite soaring uranium levels in her urine      ve years after combat, Picou  s catastrophic physical collapse was dissociated entirely from the environment of war.   
For Michael Kelly, the road to Basra marked the end of a pilgrimage, the moment when he could       nd relief in a triple termination: to the Gulf War  s virtual disconnectedness, to the war itself, and to the murky humiliations of America  s Vietnam syndrome. For Picou, by contrast, that same highway was where her personal and professional termination would begin, the place where the war  s corporeal disconnectedness would begin in earnest. For Picou, the Highway of Death marked the onset of a different kind of disconnection  between her body  s collapse and her struggle to be believed as she plunged into an unending battle to win of   cial military acknowledgement as a postcombat war casualty. For Picou, by March  the Gulf War had barely begun.   
In ignoring the unfolding of slow violence across environmental and epidemiological time, Kelly, like Virilio, accepted the Gulf War  s face-value brevity. The title of Kelly  s book  Martyr  s Day: Chronicle of a Small War   underscores this image of a minicon   u64258 ict tidily contained, a con u64258 ict he dubs the Hundred Hour War.   When he revisits his book eight years after publication to add a post-/ foreword, Kelly mounts an argument that would become widespread in rationalizing the then imminent  Iraq War, namely, that a direct line could be drawn between the Gulf War  s sanitary brevity, America  s cutting-edge precision materiel, and American military humanitarianism:   
The Gulf War wasn  t named a war. It was named an operation   Operation Desert Storm. An operation is not a war; it is a surgical event. It is something the de     nitional purpose of which is limited: get in, get the tumor, get out.The Gulf War was run as an operation, and as an operation it worked very wellThe troops went in and removed the tumor from Kuwait, which was the sole goal of the operation. Few people got killed. (And in few,   I am including an assessment of Iraqi deaths, which were much higher than Allied deaths, but remarkably low considering the lethal capacity of Iraq  s enemy; the Gulf War was the     rst important demonstration of the ability of the new American military to exploit its overwhelming technological superiority to produce a historic contradiction in terms  effective humanitarian war.)   
The notion that surgical strikes, precision warfare, and smart bombs exhibit a morally exact intelligence is understandably widespread. In America, we are primed to view contemporary life as an incessant, accelerating series of technological upgrades, each promising more marvels than the last. Inside this progress narrative, the cults of speed, novelty, and spectacle can seem to generate their own innate morality. It is easy, in such a technological climate, to grant each new weapons system an enhanced ethical potency.   
What Kelly fails to observe in retrospect is the shadow of imprecision trailing behind those luminous technologies of precision streaking across the sky, a shadow that for months, years, decades, generations would jeopardize the lives of random civilians through the lethal legacies of incinerated munition depots, depleted uranium, and unexploded cluster bombs. Quick causal leaps from technological superiority   to effective humanitarian war   allow no place for what Hiroshima journalist Akira Tashiro terms war  s discounted casualties. Kelly  s ornate surgical metaphor is especially inapt, given the carcinogenic risks associated with depleted uranium wars: the same surgical   technologies used to remove the Iraqi tumor   are instrumental in tumor spread. What kind of surgeon operates with instruments so radioactive that they may catalyze literal cancers in the name of metaphorically excising them?   
More apt is Rachel Carson  s metaphor of the unselective bludgeon,   which she invokes to describe purportedly target-speci      c insecticides. Writing in the aftermath of death-camp science and the science behind Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Carson was all too aware how readily the civilizational rhetoric of progress and precision could cloak barbarous consequences. In exposing the long-term perils of unchecked techno-boosterism, she stressed how often the precision pitch relies on reckless promises of miraculous, merciful selectivity.   
Kelly, in advocating an ethics of corporeal intimacy over the confounding paradoxes of virtual distance, succumbs to an environmentally obsolete image of war as spectacle. What he observes is not a luminous victory for both America and unmediated empiricism, but rather unwittingly the mirage of war  s end. A visible precision  readily framed as instant spectacle  may mask a devastating imprecision, invisible and inhumane, dispersed across the desert sands and across the sands of time. In trusting the authority of his eyes to bring the war to closure, Kelly fails to acknowledge the chemical and radiological perils that lie ahead for Iraqis; for the region  s water, earth, and air; for creatures domestic and wild; for the region  s crops; and for American troops as well. Beyond the vanishing point of Kelly  s sight line stretches the prospect of months, years, generations of epidemiological and environmental threat, a threat that Carol Picou, for one, would come to know with a different kind of intimacy, the intimacy of her own disintegrating organs and crumbling bones. Entering those incinerated tanks along the Highway of Death, Picou unknowingly entered a new phase of that small war   to which her body  s cells would bear corrosive witness.   
Hysteria, Millenarianism, and Slow Violence Disavowed   
In the aftermath of the Gulf War, the forces of epidemiological disavowal gained an ally from an unexpected quarter: Princeton literary scholar Elaine Showalter. Showalter, best known for her brilliant, pathbreaking work on the cultural production of gendered madness, adjudged in her book Hystories that Gulf War syndrome was the result of a media-stoked millennial hysteria. Showalter maintained that with the millennium  s approach, Americans were especially susceptible to social panics, hence the rise of alien abduction, Satanic ritual abuse, multiple-personality syndrome, the recovered-memory movement, and Gulf War syndrome  all of them, in her view, millennial epidemics of hysterical disorders and imaginary illnesses, and all virally transmitted through the media.   
Gulf War syndrome could thus best be understood as a hysterical plotline   that gave shape and meaning to the war neuroses of returning veterans:   
Patients learn about diseases from the media, unconsciously develop the symptoms, and then attract media attention in an endless cycle. The human imagination is not in     nite, and we are all bombarded by these plot lines every day. Inevitably, we all live out the social stories of our time.   
Gulf War syndrome thus becomes little more than a feedback loop in which psychogenic symptoms   generate stories, which in turn generate further self-identifying victims. As a       n-de-si 'e8cle hysterical script, Gulf War syndrome, like alien abduction and Satanic ritual-abuse stories, thereby becomes part of a media-transmitted psychological plague. Showalter dismisses objections to her theory as evidence of resistance to psychology itself: A century after Freud, many people still reject psychological explanations for symptoms; they believe psychosomatic disorders are illegitimate and search for physical evidence that     rmly places cause and cure outside the self.     
Despite its idiosyncratic millennial-media spin, Showalter  s argument is continuous with a slew of narratives of disavowal that are quick to dismiss or trivialize causes outside the self.   What such narratives downplay is the way each war generates a distinctive, historically speci     c chemical, radiological, epidemiological, and environmental legacy. As the technologies of war shift, so does the composition of the aftermath. Showalter, obsessed with the millennium  s media prelude, de u64258 ects attention away from the aftermath in all its textured chemical and radiological speci    city.   
Moreover, if Gulf War syndrome (or more accurately, Gulf War illness) really were expressive of a       n-de-si 'e8cle media-induced panic and had no root environmental causes, then the moment for that panic has long passed: the millennium has come and gone, as have the media-stoked millennial panics.   Yet the number of veterans reporting Gulf War illness continues to soar. In,when Showalter published her book, some,Us. Gulf War veterans were af u64258 icted; by,eight years after the uneventful passing of the millennium, that number had surpassed ,. The inhabitants of the Basra region, where depleted uranium weaponry was used extensively during the Gulf War, share some disturbingly similar symptoms to America and Britain  s ailing veterans. Are we to believe that the Basrans also contracted these symptoms from America  s millennial media? After NATO planes deployed depleted uranium-tipped missiles in the Balkan Wars, returning European troops reported a high incidence of peacekeeper  s syndrome,   again with strong epidemiological similarities to the symptoms suffered by Gulf War veterans and the Basrans. All three groups experienced, in particular, spikes in leukemia, renal collapse, and birth deformities. While the science on this remains incomplete  indeed, it has in many instances been insuf   ciently investigated or obstructed  the overlapping tendencies in the epidemiological aftermath of depleted uranium wars are cause, at the very least, for a more precautionary approach.   
By insisting that Gulf War syndrome is the creation of millennial panics, the mass media, and veteran hysteria, Showalter excludes from the realm of explanation battle     eld environmental forces. Her line of thinking thereby shrinks the spatial and temporal frames of the aftermath; it is a line of thinking readily reconciled with the military  s dismissal of cases such as Carol Picou  s: etiology unknown, not combat-related.   Surely we can acknowledge the power of plot bombardment   without losing sight of the less metaphoric battle   eld bombardment that profoundly shapes the bodily aftermath?   
Showalter, like others in the disavowal camp, displays a na 'efve, unwarranted faith in the commitment by the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs to a thorough, well-funded investigation. The historic track record of such organizations  most notably, toward atomic veterans and casualties of Agent Orange  gives ample grounds for skepticism. The Us. military has a long record of dissimulation on such matters, a record of it  s all in your mind   dismissals, of foot dragging and of underfunded, half-hearted science. For twenty years it dismissed the physiological effects of Agent Orange as a grand hallucination. Similarly, it would take the Us. military until   seventeen years after the of     cial end of Kelly  s small war    to acknowledge that Gulf War illness exists and has material chemical causes.   
Temporal Camou   u64258 age and the Politics of Belatedness   
As we have seen, the proponents of smart   wars often market them as humane because they appear to promise not just greater accuracy but greater brevity. However, the Iraq War that began in  complicated that assumption, exposing the chasm between a hygienically smart   war and the messy hazards of a drawn-out, urban guerilla con   u64258 ict. Innumerable commentators, of course, have made this point. However, they typically continue to overlook the way the speci   c technologies that purport to shorten a con u64258 ict may delay, disperse, and therefore extend precision   warfare  s ecological impact. Such technologies, when they compromise the environment, morph into long-term killers, creating landscapes that in u64258 ict lingering, off-camera casualties. Time itself becomes the ultimate cover-up, a dependable ally in camou u64258 aging smart   warfare  s sprawling toll.   
Environmentalists routinely face the quandary of how to convert into dramatic form urgent issues that unfold too slowly to qualify as breaking news  issues like climate change and species extinction that threaten in slow motion. Any environmentalist who seeks to tally the delayed-action casualties of precision   warfare labors under a similar disadvantage. How many years, how many decades, how many generations will he or she be granted to come up with an always-approximate count that includes war  s after-dead? Since,depleted-uranium ordnance has been deployed in Afghanistan, Bosnia, Kosovo, Kuwait, Serbia, Somalia, and Chechnya and   in unprecedented quantities  during the  war in Iraq. Given depleted uranium  s. billion-year half-life, what can counting even mean?   
War deaths from environmental toxicity demand patient, elaborate proof. Spikes in renal collapse; infertility; leukemia; testicular, brain, and breast cancers; and clusters of infant malformations are harder to link to war  s technologies than a bullet through the head. The military statistician can simply count corpses within a given place and time, subdivide those columns into combatants and civilians, then draw a line beneath his sums. Such calculations conform tidily to our preconceptions about the time frame within which a war is waged. However, to view war through the prisms of ecological time and genetic mutation demands a different ethical attention span. Uranium, after all, is genotoxic and chemically alters DNA.   
An earlier generation of environmental historians       rst addressed this problem of the relationship between changing military technologies, of    cial disavowal, and belated casualties. Thomas Whiteside  s The Withering Rain: America  s Herbicidal Folly and John Lewallen  s Ecology of Devastation: Indochina (both published in ) launched the by now extensive literature on the protracted lethality of Agent Orange. In,Harvey Wasserman and Norman Solomon  s Killing Our Own: The Disaster of America  s Experience with Atomic Radiation detailed the catastrophic long-term impact of atmospheric nuclear testing on America  s atomic soldiers.   The turn to depleted-uranium warfare and the unprecedented proliferation of cluster bombs demands that we revisit the question of who counts as a casualty. Who is counting the veterans slain or disabled by environmentally transmitted friendly     re   and the deferred casualties among refugees returning to poisoned, radiated landscapes, both groups harboring the illusion that the war is safely behind them?   
What accounts for depleted uranium  s sudden surge in military popularity? As a by-product of nuclear testing and nuclear power, depleted uranium is extremely cheap  indeed, better than free. A half century of nuclear-weapons and nuclear-power production has left the Department of Defense with more than a billion pounds of nuclear waste in storage. The Department of Defense is delighted to off-load some of that waste onto arms manufacturers, gratis, in the form of depleted uranium. The result is a seductive kind of alchemy: weapons manufacturers magically cut their production costs while the Defense Department magically rids itself of a        vealarm waste product that no American wants buried in their backyard. The result is a kind of antienvironmental recycling that converts highly toxic waste into even more deadly explosive forms.   
In a classi     ed acknowledgement of depleted uranium  s perils, Britain  s Atomic Energy Authority warned that, in the Gulf War  s wake, depleted uranium could enter the food chain and cause a half million premature Iraqi and Kuwaiti deaths. By expanding its depleted-uranium arsenal, America is effectively exporting nuclear waste to foreign soil  nuclear waste that contains traces of plutonium, for which there are no safe levels. This nuclear waste also contains the uranium isotope,which does not exist in nature and has caused concern among epidemiologists. Dr. Michael Kilpatrick, a leading Pentagon spokesperson on DU has asserted that our studies in the United States over     fteen years have not shown depleted uranium going from soil into groundwater.   However, as Dan Fahey notes, several scienti   c studies have refuted Kilpatrick  s claim by demonstrating the seepage of DU into aquifers and ecosystems:   
Depleted uranium dumped into a pit at the Starmet (formerly Nuclear Metals) manufacturing plant in Concord, Massachusetts, has leached through the soil into groundwater. The State of Massachusetts permits drinking water to contain up to  micro-grams of uranium per liter, but test wells at the Starmet site have measured levels up to,micrograms of uranium per liter water. A recent study found DU in the sapwood and bark of oak trees on the Starmet site; the DU was apparently transferred to the sapwood through uptake of contaminated groundwater.   
Foreign war zones may appear far-off and, yes, foreign civilians (and the environments on which they depend) bear the brunt of the noxious load. However, they do not bear that load alone: as we have seen, American and British troops also become victims of depleted uranium  s slow-motion slaughter.   
The Pentagon loves depleted uranium not just because it  s free, but also because the metal  s density gives it a high penetrative capacity. That means depleted-uranium munitions can be       red from greater distances, ensuring improved kill range   and thereby purportedly helping keep Us. troops out of harm  s way. But such reasoning depends on a myopic notion of harm  s way   and kill range  ; both euphemisms demand an environmental gloss. For we need to measure a weapon  s kill range   not just across battle    eld space but across ecological and genetic time as well.   
When a depleted-uranium warhead strikes a metal target, the depleted uranium spontaneously combusts, releasing minute glass particles in aerosol form. These so-called ceramic aerosols, despite the aesthetic elegance of that phrase, give off no scent, so troops and civilians alike inhale them unknowingly. Because ceramic aerosols emit radiation in potentially lethal doses, if they enter your lungs or if you ingest them or if they seep into a cut, you  re at grave risk of developing life-threatening renal carcinoma, leukemia, lymphomas, or any one of multiple cancers. Most cancers take        ve to thirty years to incubate.   
Narrating the Aftermath: The Challenges of Scale   
In February,on the eve of the Gulf War, the nuclear scientist Leonard A. Dietz warned of catastrophic consequences if the United States and its allies introduced depleted-uranium weaponry to the battle      eld. Dietz  s prescient appeal was ignored. As a consequence the Gulf War has left in its wake radioactive landscapes that will continue, for untold years, to wage widespread, random warfare. When Dietz cautioned against integrating depleted uranium into conventional warfare, his alarm was grounded in experience. During the late s, he was employed to monitor depleted-uranium levels outside an Albany factory that produced cannon shells for the Air Force. New York state authorities, on learning that radiation levels near the factory had reached ten times permissible state standards, shut down the plant. The subsequent cleanup cost more than $ million.   
Dietz underscored the hypocrisy of such stringent domestic regulation when the United States was creating in the Gulf an in     nitely more toxic environment for its troops and for the region  s inhabitants. Shortly after the Gulf War began, Dietz observed: To protect the health of Americans, we shut down a factory for discharging the equivalent of about two mm shells into the atmosphere per month. How can we justify using a million such shells in Iraq and Kuwait, most of it in only four days of war?     
Major Doug Rokke, former director of the Bradley Radiological Laboratory in Fort McLellan, Alabama, makes a similar argument to Dietz. Rokke was tasked with leading an operation to clean up American military vehicles shipped back to the United States in the Gulf War  s aftermath. That clean up, Rokke notes, took four years. What does that indicate about the toxic threat those war-exposed vehicles posed, not to speak of the long-term threat to the environment whose toxicity went untreated?   
No sooner had military victory been declared in the Gulf War than the public relations battle was joined to shield depleted uranium materiel from environmental critiques that might jeopardize its future in the United States   arsenal. On March, Lt. Col. M. V. Ziehmn of the Los Alamos National Laboratory sent out this memo to all of     cers in the      eld:   
Depleted Uranium penetrators were very effective against Iraqi armorbut there has been and continues to be a concern regarding the impact of DU on the environment. Therefore, if no one makes a case for the effectiveness of DU on the battle.     eld, DU rounds may become politically unacceptable and thus, be deleted from the arsenalI believe we should keep this sensitive issue at mind when after-action reports are written.   
On receiving this memo in Kuwait where he was leading his meticulous effort to scour vehicles of DU residues before shipping them back to the United States, Rokke read it as an unambiguous instruction to self-censor: [W]e want this stuff  don  t write anything that might make it dif      cult for us to use it again.     
Pentagon of     cials closed ranks around a public insistence that DU was environmentally innocuous. Former Pentagon spokesman Dr. Michael Kilpatrick was especially vocal and insistent: depleted uranium, he declared, is a lethal but safe weapons system.I think we can be very con    dent that what is in the environment does not create a hazard for those living in the environment and working in it.   But sometimes a less decisive view slipped through. The military bene   ts are so much larger compared to any health problems,   Colonel James Naughton declared,   
[w]e feel we have to use it. It  s radioactive  I wish it wasn  t, but I can  t change the laws of physics. The issue is, once you  ve had a hit, once you  re involved in the catastrophic failure of the tank, did the crew survive long enough to really care whether it was tungsten or depleted uranium that hit them? Anyone who does should count themselves damn lucky. I  m sure every one of them would thank God that they lived forty years to contract lymphoma.   
What Naughton acknowledges openly here is a two-speed lethality, the difference between what I call cold- and hot-war casualties. Here, as is typically the case, the immediate risk in the heat of battle trumps the violence of deferred effects. But as Carol Picou, Doug Rokke, and veterans in their thousands  not to mention far greater numbers of Iraqis  already knew in their soft organs and in the marrow of their bones, you can become a post-combat war casualty in well under forty years. As Major Rokke explains:   
Four years after the       rst Gulf War I was blowing  micrograms of uranium per liter of urine. That  s,times the permissible level. I was pissing     reMy immune system is fucked up. I get endless rashes, open sores that bleed, renal problems. My kidneys are gone to crap, my lungs have gone to crap, my bones are crumbling. My teeth break off and fracture. Uranium replaces calcium. Chemistry.   
To revisit Michael Kelly  s title, a chronicle of Rokke  s small war   requires a different type of attention span and more       ne-grained narrative strategies. The slow, invisible ousting of calcium by uranium in the body isn  t compatible with the triumphal narrative arc that leads, ineluctably, to the tank-andcorpse scene that delivers a satisfying terminus to Kelly  s victory quest. We need counternarratives that locate the Highway of Death circa March  as not a scene of     nality, but an early moment in a far longer story of slow violence, of random, unof   cial hostilities fought out in the cellular theatres of a physically dispersed aftermath. The task facing both epidemiologists and environmentalists is how to track and recount the winding, concealed metamorphoses of sequestration.   
The narrative challenges posed by slow violence of this kind are challenges of catastrophic miniaturism, as the dif     culty of narrating temporal duration is compounded by the dif   culty of narrating physical scale. What would constitute adequate protection?   Rokke asks of depleted uranium. There is none. This stuff is  microns. It  s smaller than the inner diameter of a red blood cell. We don  t have respiratory      lters anyplace that can stop it short of a space suit.   These microscopic temporal narratives of preentry threat and postentry mutation are ampli   ed by a spatial threat that, again, passes beneath the levels of naked eye detection. Pentagon spokesmen have asserted that because depleted uranium is heavier than lead, it lies where it falls and can  t pose a mobile risk. But as research by Dr. Dietz and others has shown, the particles in question are so minute     ner than talcum powder  that they can attach themselves to miniscule particles of sand and become readily resuspended in desert winds. Thus, Dietz concludes, the fallout range of airborne DU aerosol dust is virtually unlimited.     
The spatial and temporal carry of this threat, together with the extreme physical scales across which it operates (from the cellular to the transnational) compound the challenge of producing simple, readily communicative narratives of risk. What we need is stories of anticipation based on the emerging science. The science itself is inescapably slow and has been further slowed by an of     cial reluctance to commit funds to long-term, in-depth research. However, this much we know: studies show that DU is carcinogenic, causes tumors and DNA damage, crosses the blood-brain barrier, deposits in the brain, deposits in the lymph nodes and testes, can cross the placenta, and enters the fetus. Alexandra Miller, a radiobiologist with the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, has discovered direct evidence that radiation from DU can damage chromosomes. Miller observes that when assaulted by depleted uranium the chromosomes break and the fragments reform in a way that results in abnormal joins. Both the breaks and the joins are commonly found in tumor cells.   On the basis of her research she has expressed concern that the chemical and radiological effects of DU were reinforcing each other and, moreover, that DU was causing indirect damage to so-called bystander cells, that is, cells adjoining those that were directly hit.   
Home and Away   
If the Gulf War is any measure, we can anticipate an even more widespread, protracted epidemic of belated casualties following the war in Iraq that began in,given the considerably greater volume of depleted-uranium munitions deployed by American and British troops and the lengthier duration of the of     cial war itself. But this judgment is based on more than just the comparative volume of DU munitions used. For the Gulf War was essentially a desert con u64258 ict, whereas the later war was decidedly more urban, so that densely populated areas suffered direct exposure to chemical and radiological risk.   
The gravity of this urban risk startled Scott Peterson, a reporter for the Christian Science Monitor, when in May  he began taking Geiger counter readings at sites across Iraq:   
Near the [heavily bombarded] Republican Palace where US troops stood guard and over,employees walked in and out of the building the radiation readings were the hottest in Iraq, at nearly,times background radiation levels. Spent shell casings still littered the ground.   
If the  war involved heightened urban exposure, there was another critical difference in the deployment of depleted uranium by Us. and British forces. Whereas most Gulf War troops, like Carol Picou, had never even heard of depleted uranium, much less the threat it posed, by  army training manuals insisted that anybody who came within seventy-      ve yards of any blown-up tank or spent shells had to wear respiratory and skin protection. The manuals also warned that contamination will make food and water unsafe for consumption.     
The Us. military, however, continued to send out mixed messages on depleted uranium  s threat. One report from the Us. Army Environmental Policy Institute asserted: If DU enters the body, it has the potential to generate signi     cant medical consequences.   Yet when questioned about the spike in cancers reported in Basra, where the Gulf War  s heaviest bombardment had occurred, director of the Pentagon  s deployment health support directorate Dr. Michael Kilpatrick responded unequivocally: To the question, could depleted uranium be playing a role, the medical answer is no.     
How were troops and their families  not to mention Iraqis permanently domiciled in the area  supposed to reconcile such contradictory messages? While Us. troops in the  war had received warnings about the hazards of getting closer than seventy-     ve yards to scorched tanks and spent munitions without respiratory and skin protection, Iraqi civilians had received no such warnings. The implications are clear. When Scott Peterson was roaming Baghdad with his Geiger counter he happened to pause by a roadside vegetable stand and chatted with a woman selling parsley, mint, and onions. Five yards away from her vegetable stand stood the scorched hulk of an Iraqi tank; some children were frolicking inside. When Peterson entered the tank, his Geiger counter started singing, registering almost,times normal background radiation. Peterson asked the vegetable vendor how often the children play inside the tank. She shrugged and replied, Every day.     
Because Iraqi civilians received no of     cial warnings about depleted uranium, and because no one has claimed responsibility for postwar cleanups, this scene is replaying itself across Iraq, as a whole army of dead tanks tempts bored children to turn them into instant jungle gyms. Let  s call one of the children playing in that radioactive tank beside the vegetable vendor Ahmed. Like most children, Ahmed yearns to be taken seriously. The tank offers him that chance, the chance to leapfrog into imaginary adulthood, to get behind the wheel of this mighty machine, steer it,      re fantasy shells at fantasy enemies. Day after day Ahmed and his friends return to that tank beside the parsley vendor to reinvent themselves as battle   eld heroes. But unbeknownst to Ahmed or his family, he is     ghting two wars at once: the war game inside his head, and another long-term war, a hide-and-seek with mortality itself.   
Did Ahmed cut himself on the tank  s jagged metal? Did he lick a       nger, wipe or pick his nose, or breathe in DU particles? If so, he may have unwittingly enlisted as a child soldier to     ght in a real biological war, waged slowly, silently against his kidneys, his lungs, his lymph glands, or his thyroid  his blood, bones, chromosomes all under     re.   
In the language of the Geneva Conventions, DU has been condemned as a weapon of indiscriminate effect,   yet its effects are not entirely indiscriminate. Its increasing military popularity threatens children most directly: children are ten to twenty times more sensitive than adults to radiation  s cancerous risks. Once DU passes into the water system, it travels from there into mother  s milk, gathering concentration as it goes, contributing to the cancer clusters among children that were recorded in the Gulf War  s aftermath, particularly in the heavily bombarded Basra region. In,eleven years after that war  s of      cial end, Basra hospitals reported a tenfold increase in birth defects and miscarriages. When Democratic congressman, doctor, and child psychiatrist Jim McDermott visited Iraqi hospitals in September,he was told by a resident obstetrician that  the average Iraqi woman giving birth no longer says, Is it a boy or a girl?   She asks, Is the baby normal or abnormal.     It would be a tragedy,   McDermott concluded, for us to bring democracy to Iraq and leave in our wake a horrendous cloud of nuclear waste.   Within six months of McDermott  s visit, the country would be subjected to a second depleted-uranium war, as tanks and planes unleashed another long dying under cover of a cloud of rhetoric about precision.     
Under such circumstances, the boundaries between the domestic and the foreign, home and away, are impossible to maintain. American and British troops are drawn disproportionately from communities that (by their own countries   standards) are poor; their fates crisscross the fates of those poor from global South war zones who must inhabit, long term, the uranium-compromised aftermath. Many wives and girlfriends of returning Gulf War veterans complained repeatedly that when making love to their husbands and boyfriends, they experienced a ferocious burning in their genitals. For years these women were ridiculed, some for suggesting that Gulf War syndrome could be transmitted through semen. Recent research suggests these women were only partly wrong. The burning is a sign that a lover  s semen is polluted with uranium. Research also points to a connection between uranium-polluted semen and increased levels of endometriosis among veterans   sexual partners. Thus depleted uranium munitions may launch a preemptive strike against both semen and the womb. This is the other ultimate sacri      ce  sacri   cing in perpetuity one  s procreative prospects and the integrity of one  s DNA.   
One man  s precision-guided missile is another man  s weapon of indiscriminate destruction. With depleted uranium, we  re not talking about rogue missiles that accidentally shred a marketplace or a wedding party. We  re talking about the triumphant, pinpoint strike that doubles as a chaotic weapon, a weapon that haphazardly strikes down civilians who, whether under some future tyranny or future democracy, just happen to live downwind in time.   
From Landmines to Cluster Bombs   
In,almost sixty years before the       rst Gulf War, the Indian Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore boarded a plane and   u64258 ew over Iraq during a British attempt to put down an anticolonial rebellion from the air. He was availing himself of a novel technological perspective: British aerial bombings in Iraq and Afghanistan during the late s and s foreshadowed the way the airplane would reshape the politics, ethics, and aesthetics of military distance during the mass bombings of civilians during World War II. On landing in Baghdad, Tagore met the chaplain at the local British air force base and observed: [T]he Christian chaplain informs me that they are engaged in bombing operations on some Sheikh villages.The men, women and children done to death there meet their fate by a decree from the stratosphere of British imperialism  which     nds if easy to shower death because of its distance from its individual victims.     
Tagore  s insight into the military power of distance remains as resonant as ever in our age of precision   warfare, above all, with the advent of the drone. The stratosphere Tagore writes of is susceptible to multiple interpretations: as a measure of the technological distance between the pilot and his invisible victims, as a measure of the geographical distance between imperial metropolis and invisible colony, and as a measure of the numbing emotional distance between the trigger act of killing and the earthly consequences far below. The emotional sanitation of war involves, in entangled ways, technological, geographical, temporal, and linguistic strategies for distancing. Particularly in our age of slow-acting precision   weapons delivered from afar, we  re readily distracted from the violence of deferred effects  those causal chains stretched thin by time. Stretched thin not just by technologies of instant spectacle but also by the forces of linguistic dissociation, those regiments of euphemism, prominent among them depleted uranium and cluster bombs.   
Humans have long relied on a combination of verbal, geographical, technological, and temporal distance to shield themselves from the enormity of what Walt Whitman called war  s red business.   How in a democracy could wars possibly be sold, justi     ed, perpetuated without the softenings of euphemism? (  Death,   Donald Rumsfeld once noted, has a tendency to encourage a depressing view of war.  ) Each con u64258 ict brings together new euphemisms, new technologies, new strategies of temporal and geographical displacement that help us keep suffering at arm  s length, allowing us to live in states of denial distinctive to our age. One crucial displacement of this kind involves the of   cial efforts to segregate  linguistically and thereby ethically  the barbarous landmine from the humane cluster bomb that, together with depleted uranium, has become a signature weapon in the contemporary battle   eld discourse of precision.     
Landmines have accrued a public stigma, especially since Princess Diana  s much-publicized walk through an Angolan mine      eld in. Later that year,  nations signed the Ottawa Landmine Treaty, which barred the further production, transfer, and use of mines    weapons of indiscriminate effect.   In con u64258 icts over the past two decades (the Balkans, Afghanistan, Iraq, and Lebanon), America, Britain, and their allies have phased out landmines and relied increasingly on cluster bombs instead. Especially in the United States, the cluster bomb has attracted less scrutiny and generated far less public indignation than the landmine. While the landmine has been denounced as backward and barbarous, the cluster bomb has become associated with the era of advanced smart   wars, wars whose technological sophistication offers the promise of a merciful, civilized precision. The United States has not only used cluster bombs in more con u64258 icts than any other nation, it has also become the most vocal advocate of this technology  s purportedly indispensable and humane intelligence.   
The cluster bomb has become a pivotal actor in the story of smart warfare  s shadow casualties  casualties that result from what one might call precision  s death lag. The rise of the cluster bomb has largely corresponded to the decline in the reputation of the landmine, ever more widely condemned as an environmental and ethical pollutant. In,the Us. Department of State adjudged landmines to be perhaps the most toxic and widespread pollution facing mankind.   The scale of landmine pollution remains forbidding:  million unexploded mines lie inches beneath our planet  s skin. Each year they kill,civilians and maim many times that number. They kill and maim on behalf of wars that ended long ago; they kill and maim as if in afterthought, spreading social and environmental havoc. In neither space nor time can mine-terrorized communities draw a clear line separating war from peace.   
The British government under former Prime Minister Tony Blair rallied behind American efforts to maintain a decisive moral divide between landmines and cluster bombs. Blair signed the  Landmine Treaty, but he showed no ethical qualms about deploying cluster bombs. On the eve of the  invasion of Iraq, Blair  s Defense secretary, Geoffrey Hoon, defended cluster bombs as legitimate, conventional weapons that his troops would be at liberty to use. Likewise, questioned about cluster bombs that the United States dropped on Afghanistan, former American Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz offered a blunt retort: [W]e have to win this war and we  ll use the weapons we need to win this war.     
How distinct are the humanitarian and environmental repercussions of landmines and cluster bombs? To address this question, we need to ponder the terms themselves, for when it comes to waging war, the softenings of euphemism are no less dispensable than military hardware. Landmines aren  t called landmines in military jargon. The technically correct term is anti-personnel mines, to distinguish them from mines that target tanks and other vehicles. Anti-personnel,   however, is one of those verbal fudgings that under the guise of technocratic exactitude obscures what it purports to reveal. Anti-personnel   is a faceless word, a word without hands or feet or arms or legs.   
According to the Us. Air Force Dictionary, anti-personnel   means designed to destroy or obstruct personnel.   But who are these personnel that the mines are so anti? An Afghan girl, late for school, who takes a short cut across a hill. A Vietnamese herder, dreaming of dinner, while rounding up his pigs. An Angolan peasant clambering down a riverbank to       ll her water jug. A Laotian farmer, stooping to harvest his rice, who reaps blindness and amputation instead.   
Webster  s de     nes personnel   as the body of persons employed in an organization.   So to call mines anti-personnel     u64258 atters their accuracy by implying that they target an organization, military or otherwise. Yet four-   fths of landmine casualties are civilians: mostly peasants and, disproportionately, children. Children  s spontaneous energy and their craving for play make them particularly vulnerable. For this reason, in heavily mined northern Somalia, mothers took to tethering their toddlers to trees. Human ingenuity has devised some  varieties of landmine, yet not one that can discriminate between a soldier  s tread and the footfall of a child.   
Peasants cannot tend their crops or     u64258 ocks without moving through their land. But to the mine  s undiscerning eye, all movement is enemy movement: any human or other mammalian body above a certain weight is adjudged to be a body in uniform  personnel in need of blowing up. Long after the troops have returned home, long after a war  s soldiers have been demobilized, the landmine maintains its unblinking vigilance. It is there to do its duty  even if ten, twenty years too late, retaliating against an enemy as unspeci   c as humanity itself. These are not anti-personnel mines, they are anti-person mines.   
  Cluster bomb   is an even more insidious misnomer than anti-personnel mine.   What distinguishes cluster bombs is less their clustering than the dispersal of their malign effects. Whether ground launched or dropped from planes, these munitions are indeed clustered at the moment of dispatch, but their impact across space and time is scattershot. Part of what  s at stake here is a numbers game. Take, for example, the Pentagon  s declaration that it dropped or       red,cluster bombs during the     rst, pre- mission accomplished   phase of the Iraq War. (The British deployed another seventy such bombs.) Using the most conservative of of   cial dud rates,  percent, this would suggest to the casual observer that some  coalition bombs failed to explode on impact, posing a long-term, landmine-like threat. In a country the size of Iraq,  unexploded munitions is a modest number. So the of    cial American and British     gures would seem consistent with the protocol in the Geneva Conventions barring the use of disproportionate     repower and weapons of indiscriminate effect.   
However, to tally cluster bombs the way we tally landmines amounts to false accounting. A cluster bomb only remains a single weapon for a few seconds after it is dispatched, until its canister bursts open to deliver (depending on the model) scores or hundreds of bomblets. Each bomblet, in turn, explodes (on impact or when touched) to release a hail of sharp metal shards that can kill or injure people up to  yards away.   
Here  s how the Human Rights Watch Report, Off Target, describes the impact of the bomblets delivered by the CBU-, a cluster bomb the Us. Air Force       rst deployed in Afghanistan in :   
The CBU-  s bombletsare soda can-sized yellow cylinders. Each one of these combined effects munitions   represents a triple threat. The steel fragmentation core targets enemy troops with  jagged pieces of metal. The shaped charge, a concave copper cone that turns into a penetrating molten slug, serves as an anti-armor weapon. A zirconium wafer spreads incendiary fragments that can burn nearby vehicles.   
Let  s do the math. Each CBU- contains  bomblets, and each bomblet harbors  jagged pieces. In other words, a single cluster bomb can dispatch,potentially lethal pieces driven outward by the blast wave at ballistic speed. The destructive capacity of the molten cone and incendiary fragments ampli     es this threat.   
Viewed this way, the coalition  s use of,cluster bombs during the       rst phase of the  Iraq War appears less restrained. Those bombs strewed  million bomblets across Iraqi cities, villages, deserts, and      elds. According to Human Rights Watch, a minimum of,bomblets failed to explode on impact. Given that some American ground-launched cluster weapons had dud rates as high as  percent, the war  s     nal     gure could be closer to a half million potentially live failures. The threat posed by each of those,to a half million live failures then needs to be multiplied by  jagged shards.   
What did all this look like from the ground?   
Mohamed Moussa, who lives in al-Hilla (sixty miles south of Baghdad), described to a British reporter how, on March, a hailstorm of silvery objects like small grapefruit   descended from tumbling white canisters onto his neighborhood. If it hadn  t exploded and you touched it, it went off immediately,   he said. They exploded in the air and on the ground and we still have some in our home, unexploded.     
That same day those grapefruit   killed  civilians and injured  in al-Hilla alone.   
It is at this point, after the initial civilian toll, that the dud bomblets are reincarnated as landmines in all but name. Their passive-aggressive presence has the power to rend a community  s social, agricultural, economic, and environmental fabric. Generals like to refer to cluster bombs euphemistically as situational obstacles,   meaning they can be used to impede the progress of enemy troops by boxing them in. But when, in de     ance of the Geneva Conventions, American, British, Israeli, and Russian forces have     red cluster bombs into populated areas, the failed offspring of those bombs become, long term and en masse, situational obstacles   to life itself.   
In Iraq, to speak of the shards of memory is to make metaphor material again. The unexploded remnants of war have assumed the sedimentary character of that nation  s layered con   u64258 icts. Landmines from the epic Iran-Iraq War continue to pose a hazard, their threat redoubled by thousands more (planted by both sides) during the Gulf War. The  million cluster munitions the allies dropped on Iraq in  have compounded this hazard. How many of them continue to strew fear across the landscape? Not to speak of the further load (from both coalition cluster bombs and Saddam Hussein  s mines) that has polluted Iraq  s land and waters since the onset of the  war.   
The problem in Afghanistan  our planet  s most heavily mined nation   is similarly strati     ed. As in Iraq, the s proved to be a dire decade for landmine pollution in Afghanistan. The Soviet occupiers left the country densely seeded with mines, turning immense huge swaths of the nation into what Lydia Monin and Andrew Gallimore have called the devil  s gardens.   The country  s Taliban-era internal con u64258 icts and American and British cluster bombing during the     war added to that deathly crop.   
Wherever troops use cluster bombs and/or landmines, a tangle of economic, humanitarian, and environmental crises typically results. National reconstruction and the safe return of refugees are impeded; medical resources become overstretched; rural dwellers face a diabolical choice between abandoning their pastures or       elds and risking death or mutilation; amidst a degraded environment, pressure on the land increases, fueling further rounds of con u64258 ict. These developments often lead to rapid deforestation and the slaughtering of wildlife. We can witness all these convergent ill effects, for example, in Angola  a lush, once agriculturally self-suf    cient country whose economic and medical fabric continues (despite the of    cial end of a twenty-   ve-year-long civil war) to be overstrained by  million landmines and the world  s highest per capita population of amputees. In Angola, desperate, displaced rural peoples have hacked down much of the country  s woodlands and decimated its once rich and varied game.   
Most people forced to adjust to living amidst unexploded ordnance are rural and surviving off the land. Across the mined globe, people have found colloquial ways to convey the mad morphing around them of the land  s former fecundity: the devil  s gardens,   Cambodia  s killing        elds,   Iraqi descriptions of cluster bomblets as strange, mutant fruit appearing in the wrong groves  deadly oranges and grapefruits dangling from palm trees. This sense of the earth  s muni   cence taking a demonic turn was evident in the language of the Vietnam War as well: the Vietcong dubbed two early American cluster bomblets (the CBU- and the BLU-) the guava and the pineapple. And in a particularly resonant coinage in terms of the violence of deferred effects, the Vietcong nicknamed another brand of cluster submunition the lazy dog  : that pseudo slumberer who takes his time to rouse himself and bite.   
The submunitions that cluster bombs dispense are often gleaming and colorful  inquisitive children readily mistake them for toys or food. Some bomblets resemble striped soda cans, others green baseballs or cigarette lighters. During the war in Afghanistan, Allied planes dropped two types of smallish yellow objects: cluster bomblets and humanitarian rations. Eventually, pamphlets explaining the difference had to be dropped too, after humanitarians warned that children would simply see yellow, reach for the false food, and be blown up.   
This was not some freak tragedy but a predictable disaster that gets reenacted every time imprecise weapons are deployed in another so-called precision war. During and after the Afghanistan War,  percent of casualties from unexploded ordnance were under eighteen. And in the aftermath of the       rst Gulf War,  percent of such casualties in southern Iraq had yet to turn     fteen. A UNICEF report has estimated that there is one landmine for every twenty children on earth, a     gure that doesn  t even include the untold number of quasi landmines in the form of cluster bomblets.   
Like most forms of pollution, cluster bomb and landmine pollution is only semirandom. Just as in Western nations toxic waste sites tend to be placed near poor or minority communities, so too unexploded ordnance pollution is concentrated in the world  s most impoverished societies, Afghanistan, Cambodia, Laos, Somalia, Angola, Mozambique, Vietnam, Somalia, Nicaragua, and El Salvador among them. Because the burden of lethal war residues is unevenly distributed between wealthy and poor nations, the physical liberty to forget the wars themselves is also unevenly distributed. As the list above suggests, many of the world  s most heavily mined societies were once cold-war battlefronts, where the superpowers fanned, funded, and armed internal con   u64258 icts, often through proxy armies. Many of these countries  destabilized, overarmed, and undermined  have descended into serial warfare. In such societies, where landmines continue to in u64258  ict belated maimings and after-deaths, the post- in post  cold war has never fully arrived. Instead, whole provinces inhabit a twilight realm in which everyday life remains semimilitarized by slow violence and in which the earth itself must be treated with permanent suspicion, as armed and dangerous.   
Our planet  s  million leftover landmines approximate in number the combined residents of California, New York, Texas, Florida, and Pennsylvania. Except that the mines are over there, not over here. As Cyrus Vance and Herbert Okun have noted:   
If children walking to school or playing in a       eld in Manhattan, Maine, or Monterey were having their legs blown off, the   
Us. government would certainly be doing everything possible to stop it. This is happening, however, in foreign places where medical care is often almost nonexistent, and physical labor is necessary for survival.   
It costs roughly  times more to remove a landmine than to lay it. The case of Kuwait after the Gulf War illustrates the human and       nancial toll that mine clearance exacts. The bill for clearing that minute, New Jersey-sized country of unexploded landmines and cluster bombs came to $ million. And before the clearance was complete, those mines had slaughtered several hundred Kuwaiti civilians,  bomb disposal workers, and  American soldiers. The     gure for deminers and American troops alone exceeds the total number of Us. forces killed during Desert Storm.   
Eighty-four countries now suffer from landmine and/or cluster bomb pollution. Most are far larger and far poorer than Kuwait. As a result, for example, it took demining agencies fourteen years to clear just  square kilometers in Afghanistan. The International Committee of the Red Cross estimates that between  million and  million landmines and bomblets remain embedded in Laotian soil and streams alone  relics of the huge load that Us. forces dropped on Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam between  and  and during the subsequent civil foment. How are Laotians to forget the twenty-     rst-century threat, as immediate as ever, from cluster bombs and landmines that rained down on them  in American time  during the era of President Johnson?   
The slow violence of unexploded munitions exacerbates the problem of political accountability. In the aftermath of war, political changes occur far faster than environmental recovery. There remains little incentive for an administration to spend taxpayer money cleaning up lethal detritus left behind in far-off countries from a predecessor  s war.   
In,the Bush administration issued a new landmine policy that put a greater distance between the American position and international efforts to universalize the  Mine Ban Treaty. Bush  s policy reversed a prior   
Us. commitment to sign that treaty by  if alternative weapons were identi     ed. The administration  s revised stance permitted the United States to deploy long-lived anti-personnel   mines in Korea and self-destructing mines anywhere in the world. With self-destructing mines,   another euphemism  and another form of temporal camou u64258 age  has arisen. As Human Rights Watch has observed, self-destructing mines may take up to nineteen weeks to become inactive. And a signi   cant number malfunction, resulting in the usual unpredictable mix of live and dead duds, a mix that continues to pose a humanitarian hazard to civilians that requires painstaking demining.   
No single nation or administration is responsible for the ongoing cluster bomb and landmine crisis. However, it does seem especially hypocritical for an American administration to campaign vocally for fetal rights while its advocacy of precision   weapons was wreaking ruin on the unborn, who months or years later would inherit an environment that treated them, anachronistically, as enemy personnel. It is equally disturbing that the Obama administration  despite advance pledges to change course on landmines  has adhered to the Bush-era policies.   
In November,ninety-two countries (including the United States) approved a treaty obliging nations to clean up cluster submunitions and other explosive remnants at war  s end. This, the        rst disarmament treaty the former Bush administration endorsed, could potentially help narrow the gap in international law between landmines and cluster bombs. The treaty was a     rst step toward acknowledging that cluster bombs, while classed as conventional weapons, often behave more like landmines   weapons of indiscriminate effect that contravene the Geneva Conventions. The treaty marked a tentative      rst step toward addressing postwar obligations. However, it has no preemptive force in a world where cluster munitions and landmines still proliferate, with lethal fecundity, faster than they can be removed. The Pentagon continues to argue that it can produce smart-weapon solutions to the cluster bomb problem, in the belief that dud levels can be reduced to as little as  percent. (That  s far below the  to  percent failure rate of America  s ground-launched cluster munitions during the  Iraq War.) However, the     ne print in the Pentagon  s position remains chilling. It insists that in future wars American forces will continue to include in their weapons mix old cluster ordnance, what the Pentagon calls legacy   munitions (as if they were irreplaceable heirlooms). Those legacy   reserves are huge: the American military has stockpiled more than a billion cluster submunitions of extremely variable antiquity and inaccuracy, like the Rockeye cluster bombs developed during the s and deployed in the Vietnam War and again in the  Gulf War. In both Vietnam and the Gulf, Rockeyes continue to in u64258 ict long-deferred twenty.   rst-century deaths and injuries.   
Mistrust and enduring animosity are the ultimate legacies of so-called legacy munitions. In Iraq and Afghanistan, as in Indochina, American cluster bombing has alienated many of the very civilians that the military purported to be liberating, by instilling in their midst a material dread that outlasts the bounds of victories and defeats. As a Church of England spokesman has put it: You will not win the hearts and minds of a people if, in your effort to provide them with a better future, your real legacy is to be associated with hidden deaths and hideous wounds for years to come.     
Imprecise intelligence makes even supposedly precise bombs dumb. In,the United States       red rumor-guided cluster bombs into urban Iraqi neighborhoods where someone or other from the CIA  s blacklist   was alleged to be hiding. Time after time, the rumor came to nothing and civilians took the hit. Formidable human, meteorological, and environmental obstacles exacerbate the inaccuracy of these weapons. For instance, pilots hoping to avoid enemy     re may drop their bomb load from inappropriately high altitudes, expanding the broad footprint over which the bombs scatter. (This has happened in the Balkans and Afghanistan.) Wind drift may drag the bomblets off course. Cluster munitions, furthermore, explode most consistently when they strike hard surfaces like roads. Soft surfaces  sand, marshy areas  result in high live failure rates, a recurrent problem if one is waging desert wars. As the cluster canister disgorges its bomblets, and as the detonating bomblets in turn spew out their jagged pieces, the dispersal area widens along with the scope for inaccuracy. The resulting imprecision in space is compounded by temporal imprecision, as the remnants maintain their assaults beyond war  s end.   
One of the strongest currents of American optimism     u64258 ows from Thomas Jefferson  s vision of land as the most prudent investment, an investment that bene   ts both the individual and the nation. You can mint more money, Jefferson observed, but you cannot mint more land. Yet that credo seems less certain when one considers a nation like Cambodia, where  million to  million active mines and uncounted cluster submunitions have rendered half the country unsafe. To demine Cambodia would amount to a miraculous land-minting scheme, effectively doubling the country  s size without conquering a neighbor.   
In terms of military strategy, landmines and cluster bombs are both area denial weapons.   The problem is that, too often, area denial   persists into the so-called postwar era, shrinking the viable earth and straining its resources. As a       rst step toward alleviating this scourge, we need to acknowledge landmines and cluster bombs as two versions of one problem; we need to recognize the ease with which cluster bombs become de facto landmines under cover of a pseudonym.   
Fifty-seven nations now possess cluster munitions and sixteen have deployed them, the United States most extensively. Ideally, we should be campaigning for a universal ban on both air- and surface-delivered cluster bombs. But given the daunting pervasiveness of these weapons, it may be more pragmatic to endorse Human Rights Watch  s initial demand that as a       rst step, all obsolete, high-failure legacy munitions be outlawed. This move needs to be supplemented by a moratorium on newer ordnance until a dud rate of less than  percent can be demonstrated. But the ultimate goal should be to outlaw all cluster bombs as weapons of indiscriminate effect.   
To achieve such a goal, we will       rst have to start dismantling the whole delusory rhetorical domain of smart wars   and precision   warfare.   
We need to demand, moreover, that the former Bush administration  s regressive landmine policy be overturned, for the sake of children and adult civilians in as yet unimagined wars, and for the sake of an environment that remains compromised wherever landmines and cluster bombs congregate. In the words of Kenneth Anderson, director of the Arms Project of Human Rights Watch: The effects of landmines as a pollutant in the environment are just now beginning to be understood.all of society pays, over and over again.   The same society-wide payments are exacted by cluster bomblets  those landmines in masquerade.   
The Highway of Harm   
Again and again with furrowed brows, our leaders pledge to keep our troops out of harm  s way.   But the highway of harm is broad and long, stretching beyond the sight lines of the generals and beyond any single generation. As nurse Carol Picou learned, the Highway of Death is a deceptive road that dips and rises through convoluted switchback narratives of disavowal, a road that, despite it  s simple two-lane surface, is traveled unwittingly at many different speeds.   
At least seventeen nations have bought depleted-uranium weapons from the United States since they were       rst showcased during the Gulf War. As these weapons and cluster bombs become increasingly enfolded into contemporary warfare, we have an ethical responsibility to redraw the boundary between the war survivor and the war casualty. People may outlast a given con u64258 ict, but if untold thousands die deferred war deaths, what kind of justice is it to call them survivors?   
In our age of depleted-uranium shells and cluster bombs, smart   wars become wars of ecological folly as we turn soil, air, and water and into slow weapons of mass destruction, wielded unremittingly against ourselves. Armies move on, as do our memories, but a deeper memory remains lodged in the earth. Despots may be deposed, but environmental mayhem outlives regime change.   
One of the greatest challenges we now face is to reinstate a more expansive vision of what it means to be secure. What time span will we allow to de     ne our national security and our security as a species? At home and across the planet, in wartime and in peace, environmental safeguards must be reasserted, safeguards on which our health, freedoms, and international standing depend. The     xation on meeting terrorism with high-tech military terror has shrunk our vision of what constitutes sustainable security. If we improved the fuel ef   ciency of America  s cars and light trucks by a mere   
. miles per gallon, we would be liberated from the need to import any oil from Saudi Arabia. Such a bold, but feasible move to conserve energy would also help reintegrate a viable environment into our vision of how to protect America in the long term.   
Americans cannot afford to shrink military threats to the future to the real but reductive threat of terrorism. If we continue to glorify poisonous weapons of fake precision, belated war deaths will become increasingly widespread, as will the political consequences of the accompanying blow-back rage. We will face an unbounded war, as the planet itself metastasizes into a combatant: the ultimate, toxic hyperpower, a force of random, abiding retribution.   
We need to       nd (as Rachel Carson did some     fty years ago) new ways to tell the slow-moving stories about the long dying; about last year  s cluster bombs that turn into next year  s killers, about depleted uranium that treats as its arbitrary enemy the child of a child as yet unborn. Carson insisted it was impossible to nourish democracy on a diet of dead rivers and poisoned     elds. Her warning applies to any vision of long-term social stability, whether at home or abroad. If a war leaves in its wake terrifyingly polluted lands and mangled genetic codes, any victory will be pyrrhic, as death by indirection becomes the ultimate form of friendly     re. No homeland can be secure if we convert the earth into a biological weapon that threatens biology itself. We  re all downwinders now, some sooner than others.   
   
 
Environmentalism, Postcolonialism, and American Studies   
We may be living in post-colonial times, but we are not yet living in post-imperial times.   
  Linda Colley, What Is Imperial History Now?     
What would it mean to bring environmentalism into a full, productive dialogue with postcolonialism? These two        elds have emerged in recent decades as among the most dynamic areas in literary studies, yet their relationship has been, until very recently, dominated by reciprocal indifference or mistrust. Unlike many initiatives within literary studies (reader response theory, say, or deconstruction), environmental studies and postcolonial studies have both exhibited an often-activist dimension that connects their priorities to movements for social change. Yet for the most part, a broad silence has characterized environmentalists   stance toward postcolonial literature and theory while postcolonial critics have typically been no less silent on the subject of environmental literature. What circumstances shaped this mutual reluctance? And what kinds of intellectual initiatives might best deepen an overdue dialogue that is belatedly starting to emerge?   
In other areas of the humanities and social sciences  notably environmental history, cultural geography, and cultural anthropology  a substantial body of work arose much earlier in the borderlands between postcolonial and environmental studies, work that recognized, among other things, the political and cultural signi     cance of the environmentalism of the poor. Yet within literary studies, a critical discipline for both the environmental humanities and postcolonial studies, such crossover work was long inhibited by a widespread assumption that the subjects and methodologies of the two     elds were divergent, even incompatible, not least in their visions of what counts as political.   
Let me turn to the events that       rst set my thinking on these issues in motion. In October,the New York Times Sunday Magazine featured a cover story by Jay Parini entitled The Greening of the Humanities.   Parini described the rise to prominence of environmentalism in the humanities, especially in literature departments. At the end of the essay, he named twenty-   ve writers and critics whose work was central to this environmental studies boom. Something struck me as odd about the list, something that passed unmentioned in the article: all twenty-    ve writers and critics were American.   
This unselfconscious parochialism was disturbing, not least because at that time I was involved in the campaign to release Ken Saro-Wiwa, the Ogoni author who was being held prisoner without trial for his environmental and human rights activism in Nigeria. Two weeks after Parini  s New York Times article appeared, the Abacha regime executed Saro-Wiwa, making him Africa  s most visible environmental martyr. Here was a writer  a novelist, poet, memoirist, and essayist  who had died       ghting the ruination of his Ogoni people  s farmland and     shing waters by European and American oil conglomerates in cahoots with a despotic African regime. Yet it was apparent that Saro-Wiwa  s writings were unlikely to     nd a home in the kind of environmental literary lineage outlined by Parini. The more ecocriticism I read, the more this impression was con   rmed. I encountered some intellectually transforming books by Lawrence Buell, Cheryll Glotfelty, Harold Fromm, Daniel Payne, Max Oelschlaeger, Scott Slovic, and many others. Yet such books tended to canonize the same self-selecting genealogy of American authors: Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, John Muir, Aldo Leopold, Edward Abbey, Annie Dillard, Terry Tempest Williams, Wendell Berry, and Gary Snyder. All are authors of in u64258 uence and accomplishment, yet all are drawn from within the boundaries of a single nation. Environmental literary anthologies, college course Web sites, and special issues on ecocriticism revealed similar patterns of predominance. Accumulatively, I realized that literary environmentalism was developing, de facto, as an offshoot of American studies. Moreover, the environmental justice movement, the branch of American environmentalism that held the greatest potential for connecting outward internationally to issues of slow violence, the environmentalism of the poor, and imperial socioenvironmental degradation remained marginal to the dominant purview of environmentalism that was becoming institutionalized through the greening of the humanities.   
The resulting national self-enclosure seemed peculiar: one might surely have expected environmentalism to be more, not less, transnational than other       elds of literary inquiry. It was unfortunate that a writer like Saro-Wiwa, who had long protested what he termed ecological genocide,   could     nd no place in the environmental canon. Was this because he was an African? Was it because his writings revealed no special debt to Thoreau, to the wilderness tradition, or to Jeffersonian agrarianism? Saro-Wiwa  s writings were animated instead by the fraught relations between ethnicity, pollution, and human rights and by the equally fraught relations between local, national, and global politics. It was futile, he recognized, to try to understand or protest the despoiling of his people  s water, land, and health within a purely national framework. For Ogoniland  s environmental ruin resulted from collaborative plunder by those he dubbed Nigeria  s internal colonialists   and by the unanswerable, transnational power of Shell and Gulf Chevron.   
Saro-Wiwa  s canonical invisibility in the United States was all the more telling given the role that America played in his emergence as an environmental writer. The United States buys half of Nigeria  s oil, and Gulf Chevron has been a signi     cant Ogoniland polluter. More af   rmatively, it was on a trip to Colorado that Saro-Wiwa witnessed a successful environmental campaign to stop corporate logging. This experience contributed to his decision to mobilize international opinion by voicing his people  s claims not just in the language of human rights but in environmental terms as well. Yet it was clear from the prevailing ecocritical perspective in literary studies that someone like Saro-Wiwa  whose environmentalism was at once profoundly local and profoundly transnational  would be bracketed as an African, the kind of writer best left to the postcolonialists.   
I became aware, however, of a second irony: that postcolonial literary critics had, in turn, shown scant interest in environmental concerns, regarding them (whether explicitly or implicitly) as at best irrelevant and elitist, at worst as sullied by green imperialism.   Saro-Wiwa  s distinctive attempt to fuse environmental and minority rights, I realized, was unlikely to achieve much of a hearing in either camp.   
These, then, were the circumstances that got me thinking about the mutually constitutive silences that persisted for so long between environmental and postcolonial literary studies. Broadly speaking, four main schisms appeared between the dominant concerns of postcolonialists and ecocritics. First, postcolonialists tended to foreground hybridity and crossculturation. Ecocritics, on the other hand, historically were drawn more to discourses of purity: virgin wilderness and the preservation of uncorrupted   last great places. Second, postcolonial writing and criticism was largely concerned with displacement, while environmental literary studies tended to give priority to the literature of place. Third, and relatedly, postcolonial studies tended to favor the cosmopolitan and the transnational. Postcolonialists were typically critical of nationalism, whereas the canons of environmental literature and criticism developed within a national (and often nationalistic) American framework. Fourth, postcolonialism devoted considerable attention to excavating or reimagining the marginalized past: history from below and border histories, often along transnational axes of migrant memory. By contrast, within much environmental literature and criticism, something different happened to history. It was often repressed or subordinated to the pursuit of timeless, solitary moments of communion with nature. Such timeless transcendentalism was shadowed by a durable tradition within American landscape writing of erasing the history of colonized peoples through the myth of the empty lands. Postcolonialist critics were wary of the role that this strain of environmental writing (especially wilderness writing) has played in burying the very histories that postcolonialists sought to unearth.   
The Place of Displacement: Cosmopolitanism and Bioregionalism   
Postcolonial critics have been understandably discomforted by preservationist discourses of purity, given the role such discourses have historically   
played in the racially unequal distribution of post-Enlightenment human rights. In the context of a romantic primordialism, the colonized, especially women, have been repeatedly naturalized as objects of heritage to be owned, preserved, or patronized rather than as the subjects of their own land and legacies. Once cultures have been discursively assimilated to nature (not least through the settler tradition of viewing the United States as nature  s nation  ), they have been left more vulnerable to dispossession  whether in the name of virgin wilderness preservation or the creation of nuclear test zones. If, in J. M. Coetzee  s terse assessment, it is certainly true that the politics of expansion has uses for the rhetoric of the sublime,   that expansionist thrust found a potent set of story lines and images in the traditions of American exceptionalism animating the work of foundational American studies thinkers like R. W. B. Lewis, Henry Nash Smith, and Perry Miller. In Donald Pease  s succinct formulation,   
those images interconnect an exceptional national subject (American Adam) with a representative national scene (Virgin Land) and an exemplary national motive (errand into the wilderness). The composite result of the interaction of these images was the mythological entity  Nature  s Nation  whose citizens believe, by way of the supreme       ction called natural law, that the ruling assumptions of their national compact (Liberty, Equality, Social Justice) could be understood as indistinguishable from the sovereign power creative of nature.   
Of critical concern within such narratives of naturally-supernaturally predestined nation building was who got cast as which kind of natural man   and natural woman.     
Autobiographical divergences sharpened intellectual differences between postcolonial and ecocritics over the politics of purity, place, nation, and history. The preeminent critics associated with postcolonialism  Kwame Anthony Appiah, Homi K. Bhabha, Edward Said, Sara Suleri, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, and Gauri Viswanathan, among others  have lived across national boundaries in ways that have given a personal edge to their intellectual investment in questions of dislocation, cultural syncretism, and transnationalism. Conversely, the most prominent American environmental writers and critics are mononationals with a deep-rooted experiential and imaginative commitment to a particular regional locale: Vermont for John Elder, the Sierra Nevada for Gary Snyder, Appalachian Kentucky for Wendell Berry, southern Indiana for Scott Russell Sanders, and Utah in Terry Tempest Williams  s case. These regionally rooted national writers were adaptively carrying forward the place commitments evinced in the New England writings of Thoreau and Robert Frost and in Willa Cather  s Nebraska.   
The tension between a postcolonial preoccupation with displacement and an ecocritical preoccupation with an ethics of place needs to be further situated in terms of cosmopolitanism on the one hand and bioregionalism on the other. Bioregionalism, in Parini  s words, entails a responsiveness to one  s local part of the earth whose boundaries are determined by a location  s natural characteristics rather than arbitrary administrative boundaries.   Gary Snyder and ecocritics John Elder, David Robertson, and David Orr are all vocal advocates of a bioregional ethic. Orr connects ecological destruction to the way people can graduate from college with obligations to no place in particular. Their knowledge is mostly abstract, equally applicable in New York or San Francisco.   (His comment evidences the antiurban bias that permeates much bioregional thinking.) In a similar vein, Elder argues that the traditional model in education has been cosmopolitanism. I  ve come to prefer a concentric and bioregional approach to learningIt makes sense  educationally  to begin with local writing; then you expand, adding layers of knowledge.     
There is much to be said for a bioregional approach: it can help instill in us an awareness of our impact on our immediate environment, help ground our sense of environmental responsibility. However, from a postcolonial perspective, a bioregional ethic poses certain problems, for the concentric rings of the bioregionalists more often open out into transcendentalism than into transnationalism. All too frequently, we are left with an environmental vision that remains inside a spiritualized and naturalized national frame.   
Much of the American imaginative and critical literature associated with bioregionalism tends toward a style of spiritual geography that is premised on what I call spatial amnesia. Within a bioregional center-periphery model, the speci     city and moral imperative of the local typically opens out not into the speci   cities of the transnational but into transcendental abstraction. In this way, a prodigious amount of American environmental writing and criticism makes expansive gestures yet remains amnesiac toward non-American geographies in which America is implicated, geographies that vanish over the intellectual skyline. The spatial amnesia that often attends a bioregional ethic has temporal implications as well: whether through the legacies of wars or our outsize consumerism, we have a history of forgetting our complicity in slow violence that wreaks attritional havoc beyond the bioregion or the nation.   
The environmentalist advocacy of an ethics of place has all too often morphed into hostility toward displaced people. Edward Abbey  s rants against Mexican immigrants, Mary Austin  s anti-Semitism, and the Sierra Club  s disastrous referendum on zero immigration all evidence a xenophobic strain running through American ethics-of-place environmentalism. With the Sierra Club in mind, Richard Rodriguez has noted how the weeping Indian in the public service commercial       rst became an environmental talisman and then, in a grim historical irony, was invoked against the immigrant descendants of Indians heading north from Mexico and Central America. Sometimes such hostility toward the displaced tilts over into a kind of Malthusian sublime, as in Snyder  s suggestion that the project of wilderness restoration would require ninety percent fewer humans. D. H. Lawrence, in Mountain Lion,   similarly elects himself to the traditions of wilderness West Malthusianism by declaiming: I think in this empty world there was room for me and a mountain lion / And I think in the world beyond how easily we might spare a million or two humans / And never miss them.   Typically, here, the human cull begins with those dispensable, anonymous, invisible inhabitants who reside in the the world beyond,   never with any culling of the poetical, wilderness-expanded egotistical male self.   
An exclusionary ethics-of-place can easily lapse into jingoistic transcendentalism, as in an essay that the Montana writer, Rick Bass, wrote in defense of southern Utah  s Red Rock country. The unprotected wilderness of the West,   Bass declared,   
is one of our greatest strengths as a country. Another is our imagination, our tendency to think rather than to accept  to challenge, to ask why and what if, to create rather than to destroy. This questioning is a kind of wildness, a kind of strength, that many have said is peculiarly American. Why place that strength in jeopardy? To lose Utah  s wilderness would be to strip westerners and all Americans of a raw and vital piece of our soul, our identity, and our ability to imagineThe print of a deer or lion in the sand, in untouched country, as you sleep  it is these things that allow you, allow us, to continue being American, rather than something else, anything else, everything else.   
In trying to rally Americans to a worthy preservationist cause, Bass may be resorting here to what Spivak calls strategic essentialism.   After all, it is the American people  s representatives who will determine the fate of Red Rock country. But such essentialism, strategic or otherwise, comes at a cost, for Bass aggrandizes and naturalizes the American national character in ways that are politically perturbing. How do we square his intimation that creative questioning is peculiarly American   with many Americans   widespread, unquestioning ignorance of the disastrous consequences (not least environmental consequences) of much Us. foreign policy? Bass  s position is predicated on, among other things, a failure of geographic imagination  a kind of superpower parochialism. If your frame is Red Rock country, the United States may seem quintessentially a nation of questioners who seek to create rather than to destroy.   But from the vantage point of the  million Vietnamese still suffering the health consequences of Agent Orange or from the perspective of vulnerable micro-minorities in Nigeria, Ecuador, or West Papua  places where extraction industry colossi like Gulf Chevron, Texaco, and Freeport McMoran run rampant  a reluctance to destroy may not seem as de     nitive an American value. We should temper Bass  s blinkered eco-nationalism with Aldo Leopold  s sobering reminder of what else it means, in environmental terms, to be an American: When I go birding in my Ford, I am devastating an oil     eld, and re-electing an imperialist to get me rubber.     
Moreover, Bass  s exaltation of the American as pure imagination  a higher soul in search of untouched country    has a dubious settler lineage. It is precisely such thinking that has impeded the American environmental movement  s efforts to diversify its support base. As African American eco-activist Jennifer Oladipo observes, the terms environmentalist and minority conjure two distinct images in most people  s minds.Religion, capitalism, and even militarism learned ages ago to reach actively across the racial spectrum. In terms of winning over minorities, they have left environmentalism in the dust.   The untouched country   pitch is unlikely to help the Us. environmental movement match, in the       eld of diversity, the Us. military  s attainments.   
From the perspective of North America  s First Peoples, the white soul-dream of untouched country   has been a source of dispossession and cultural erasure. It contributed, classically, to the Ahwahneechee  s eviction from Yosemite as part of Yosemite  s reinvention as pure wilderness.   Invoking the print of a deer or lion in the sand   as a timeless icon of an all-American spirituality thus       ts uneasily with the historical imprint of internal colonialism on the West, most dramatically the imprint left by the Indian wars.   
For people relegated to the unnatural   margins of nature  s nation  like gay minority writers Richard Rodriguez and Melvin Dixon  the wilderness experience can look ominously puri     ed (as opposed to pure). In his ironically titled essay True West,   Rodriguez describes how, setting off on a hike, three minutes beyond the trailhead, he hears rustling in the bushes. Instead of experiencing transcendental uplift, he fears ambush by Snow White and the seven militias.   And in Ride Out the Wilderness, poet-critic Dixon has chronicled how for African Americans, wilderness has been associated with the travails of exile: it is more a place of eviction and historical hauntings than of redemptive silences. On the subject of race, gender and the     elds of memory,   poet and essayist Camille Dungy has this to say:   
If memory is home, I am a long way from hope. I have escaped and am running. I have to remember what has been said: I am black and female; no place is for my pleasure. How do I write a poem about the land and my place in it without these memories: the runaway with the hounds at her heels; the complaint of the poplar at the man-cry of its load; land a thing to work but not to own?   
The poet Ed Roberson expresses similar hauntings bluntly: American trees had ropes in them.     
To observe all this is not to dismiss ethics-of-place environmentalism out of hand, but rather to render visible a particular lineage of variously misanthropic, jingoistic, xenophobic, racially blinkered, gender entitled, and amnesiac celebrations of wilderness that mark an imaginative failure while masquerading as elevated imaginings. Clearly the emotional power generated by attachments to place can be an invaluable resource for environmental mobilization. Yet having said that, we need to recognize how such attachments do not possess any inherent politics: they can induce a conservative, bigoted environmental ethic or a progressive, inclusive one.   
Our intellectual challenge surely is how to draw on the strengths of bio-regionalism without succumbing to what one might term eco-parochialism. Here we should heed the call by British environmentalist Richard Mabey for a less brittle, less exclusionary environmental ethics. As Mabey writes, the challenge, in a world where the differences between native and stranger are fading, is to discover veins of local character which are distinctive without being insular and withdrawn.   Yet in response to the blurring of the distinction between native and stranger we have frequently witnessed a defensive tendency to naturalize rootedness and stigmatize as alien people who are perceived to look or talk differently. Precisely this kind of defensiveness prompted Paul Gilroy, in a British context, to question the racial implications of Raymond Williams  s ethics of place.   
Williams (whose Country and the City stands as an in   u64258  uential precursor to ecocriticism) championed what he called rooted settlements   or natural communities.   These were communities in which lived, worked and placeable social identities   provided anchorage against the dislocating effects of global capitalism and the abstractions of national identity. However, Williams  s advocacy of natural communities   was accompanied, on occasion, by a suspicion not just of capitalism  s dislocating effects but of dislocated people themselves, as when he expressed sympathy for local resistance in rural British communities to the most recent immigrations of more visibly different peoples.   It was insuf   cient, Williams argued, to say these newcomers are as British as you are,   because that was to invoke a merely legal de   nition of what it is to be British Any effective awareness of social identity depends on actual and sustained social relationships. To reduce social identity to formal de   nitionsis to collude with the alienated super.   cialities of  the nation.     Writing from a more cosmopolitan, postcolonial perspective, Gilroy voiced alarm at such sentiments. He pointed out that Williams  s vision of natural community   meant that minority immigrants and their British-born descendants would     nd themselves typecast as innately foreign and treated as second-class citizens. How many generations, one might ask, does it take for the visibly different   to get upgraded to natural   members of the national community?   
The terms of this exchange are directly pertinent to the project, still in its infancy, of giving environmental literary studies adequate international dimension. Gilroy  s unease with the implications of Williams   remarks dramatizes the need for us to recuperate, imaginatively and politically, experiences of hybridity, displacement, and transnational memory for any viable spatial ethic. Postcolonialism can help diversify our thinking beyond the dominant paradigms of wilderness and Jeffersonian agrarianism in ways that render ecocriticism more accommodating of what I call a transnational ethics of place.   
Let me situate this ethics through a second disagreement, this time involving two writers rather than two critics. Its importance lies in the symptomatic terms of the engagement but also in the rarity of a regional American writer engaging in depth with a transnational postcolonial writer. The proli     c southern Indiana essayist Scott Russell Sanders has written powerfully about the scars of displacement in American history, scars left by the slave trade, the Indian wars, and the ravenous power of developers who wrench the rural poor from their familial places. In the tradition of Aldo Leopold and Wendell Berry, Sanders proceeds to track the ecological, spiritual, and community damage in u64258 icted by an American tradition of moving on. He proselytizes instead for staying put,   and in an essay of that title, takes Salman Rushdie to task for celebrating cosmopolitan displacement without gauging the environmental, psychic, and neighborly costs. Two statements by Rushdie rankle in particular: his assertion that to be a migrant is, perhaps, to be the only species of human being free of the shackles of nationalism (to say nothing of its ugly sister, patriotism)   and his celebration of migrant hybridity in these terms:   
The effect of mass migrations has been the creation of radically new types of human beings: people who root themselves in ideas rather than places, in memories as much as in material things; people who have been obliged to de     ne themselves  because they are as de   ned by others  by their otherness; people in whose deepest selves strange fusions occur, unprecedented unions between what they were and where they     nd themselves.   
Sanders quite justly questions whether immigrants are indeed unshackled from chauvinistic prejudice; people who have moved a lot can be just as bigoted as those who have stayed put. But in disparaging people who refuse to root themselves in place, Sanders is ultimately on shakier ground.   
My empathy for aspects of both Sanders   and Rushdie  s positions     u64258  ows from the antithetical forms of marginalization to which the two writers were subjected. I described Sanders as a regional writer    a badge of pride for some, but also grounds for belittlement by the bicoastal and transatlantic sensibilities that make the big decisions along the London-New York-Los Angeles Anglophone cultural axis. If you  re regional  and especially from some region in the Midwest   u64258 yover zone  you  re innately minor league, irredeemably provincial, paradoxically unplaceable in your rural placedness.   
From that perspective, Rushdie  s musings about migrant hybridity must seem, for a writer like Sanders, buttressed by an offputting cosmopolitan entitlement. Yet Rushdie, before he won the Booker Prize, was an immigrant who, while possessing class advantages, faced profound racial obstacles. He is of Paul Gilroy  s generation: both came of age to the soundtrack of Enoch Powell  s rivers of blood   speech, with its imprecations against the rising peril   of immigrants who were unassimilable to the British nation. Rushdie, like Gilroy, became a minority public intellectual against the hostile backdrop of Thatcher  s rise to power. During that era a minority writer or intellectual could not hazard a rural, place-based English identity  staying put close to the land  without suffering the most profound alienation and discrimination, more intensely than in metropolitan London.   
Although Sanders strives to be evenhanded, his land-ethic intolerance keeps resurfacing. He traces  pure speculation  John Berryman  s suicide to his dogma of rootlesness.   Sanders stacks the decks with his choice of classist terms, condemning vagrancy   and drifters.   Symptomatically, in explicating the higher ethic of staying put he doesn  t engage the possibility of an urban commitment to place, not least among landless renters. In a turn that typi     es a powerfully canonized strain of American environmental writing, Sanders draws a direct line between deracination on the one hand and, on the other, a dereliction of duty and poverty of being that are simultaneously civic, ethical, spiritual, and environmental. To be landless,   he asserts, is not to lack property but to lack responsibility.   And only by knocking against the golden calf of mobility, which looms so large and shines so brightly, have I come to realize that it is hollow. Like all idols, it distracts us from the true divinity.   And so hybridity and mobility move to the de   cit side of the ecological register, as displacement is trumped yet again by a place-based  indeed, place-dependent  environmental transcendentalism.   
Postcolonial Pastoral and Environmental Double Consciousness   
A transnational ethics of place can help us integrate into the powerful conventions of pastoral the violence beneath colonial and postcolonial uprootings. As an imaginative tradition, English pastoral has long been both nationally de     nitive and fraught with anxiety. At the heart of English pastoral lies the idea of the nation as garden idyll, where neither labor nor violence intrudes. To stand as a self-contained national heritage landscape, English pastoral has depended on the screening out of colonial spaces and histories, much as the America wilderness ideal has entailed an amnesiac relationship toward the Indian wars of dispossession.   
But what happens when memories of colonial space intrude upon pastoralism, disturbing its pretensions to national self-de     nition and self-containment? The result is a kind of writing that I have called postcolonial pastoral, writing that refracts an idealized nature through memories of environmental and cultural degradation in the colonies. Postcolonial pastoral can be loosely viewed as a kind of environmental double-consciousness.   
We can see this process at work in Naipaul  s autobiographical novel, Enigma of Arrival, which draws on his life on a manorial estate in Wiltshire  Thomas Hardy country, the heartland of English pastoral. Naipaul self-consciously appends himself, in this novel, to the imaginative lineage of English pastoral by invoking William Constable, John Ruskin, Oliver Goldsmith, Thomas Gray, William Wordsworth, William Cobbett, Richard Jeffries, and Hardy. In the process, Naipaul engages the centuries-long English tradition of hortus conclusus, the enclosed garden.   
However, Naipaul  s perspective is that of an uprooted immigrant whose vision of England can never be fully self-enclosed. In other words, his experience of pastoral cannot be contained by the historical and spatial amnesias demanded by an all-English frame. Instead, through the double consciousness of postcolonial pastoral he experiences the hortus conclusus as indissociable from transnational, colonial environments and memories. The counterpoint to the manor garden that he inhabits in Wiltshire is the Trinidadian sugar plantation to which his grandparents were indentured from India. Thus Naipaul views his environment through the double prism of postcolonial pastoral: behind the wealth and tranquility of an English idyll he remembers the painful, dystopian shadow garden of the trans-Atlantic plantation that helped make that idyll possible.   
Against this backdrop, we can approach Richard Drayton Nature  s Government as, in part, a map of transnational shadow gardens. In his book   on the surface, a history of the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew  Drayton examines, in his words, how the natural sciences became included in an ideology of  Improvement   which ordered enclosure at home and expansion abroad.   Kew, for Drayton, is not a self-enclosed English space, but part of an extraordinary network of imperial gardens (stretching from St. Vincent to South Africa, Ceylon, Australia, and beyond) that became implicated in entangled global developments of botanical knowledge, but also in economic power, political policy, and imperial administration.   
If it is no longer viable to view environmentalism as a Western luxury, how are we best to integrate environmental issues into our approach to postcolonial literatures and vice versa? Jamaica Kincaid  s work offers a rich place to tease out some of the possibilities such a rapprochement allows. Kincaid, a Caribbean-American postcolonial writer, was for many years the New Yorker  s resident gardening columnist  likely the only anticolonial gardening columnist the New Yorker will ever have. She was equally impassioned by lupines and by colonial history. At the heart of much of her non     ction stands this blunt question: What is the relationship between gardening and conquest?     
Kincaid herself exempli     es that relationship, given that the British transported her violated ancestors to Antigua. But colonial ships also carried to Antigua the alien plants and animals that have since spread across the island. Kincaid  s interest in Antigua  s environmental viability thus becomes inseparable from her obsession with ancestral memories of displacement; from where she stands, the separation of botany from the history of slavery seems profoundly unnatural. That much becomes apparent in The Flowers of Empire,   an essay in which Kincaid recounts how, in a moment of botanical rapture, colonial history ambushed her:   
One day I was walking through the glasshouse area of Kew Gardens in London when I came upon the most beautiful hollyhock I had ever seen. Hollyhocks are among my favorite     u64258 owers, but I had never seen one quite like this. It had the characteristic large,   u64258 ared petal, and it was a most beautiful yellow, a clear yellow, as if it  the color yellow  were just born, delicate, just at the beginning of its history as yellow.   It was on looking at the label on which was written its identi   cation that my whole being was sent awhirl. It was not a hollyhock at all but gossypium, the common cotton. Cotton all by itself exists in perfection, with malice toward none. But it played a tormented, malevolent role in the bondage of my ancestors.   
Here, as in Naipaul  s Enigma of Arrival, Kincaid  s passion for nature is complicated by her postcolonial double consciousness.   
One can read Kincaid  s writings against John Elder  s insistence that bioregionalism is a more responsible pedagogical model than cosmopolitanism. For Kincaid confounds such oppositions. A Small Place, her non      ctional polemic about Antigua and tourism, could be read as bioregional in approach: it takes as its starting point the natural boundaries of this tiny island. Yet the small place where Kincaid stands, the place where knowledge must begin, is inextricably local and transnational. Place is displacement, for British colonists killed off the indigenous inhabitants and replaced them with transported slaves. In the process, the colonists turned what was once a well-wooded island into a desert, clearing the forests to grow slave crops  sugar and cotton. As a result of this slave-era environmental degradation, the island has lost its ability to retain water and is, to this day, forced to import it.   
This colonial-induced drought has deepened Antigua  s economic reliance on tourism. So ironically, a place marked by a long history of coercive labor and violence has been reinvented as an Edenic retreat where Europeans and Americans can experience nature as pure  a paradise beyond reach of work and time. We can thus read A Small Place as Kincaid  s effort to return this Eden to a transnational ethics of place. In this way, Kincaid allows us to see Antigua, like Naipaul  s Trinidad, as a shadow island, a corrective to the spatial amnesia of a self-contained, regenerative England pastoral of the kind evident in, say, E. M. Forster  s Howard  s End.   
  Alien Soil,   Kincaid  s essay on English and colonial nature, captures her paradoxical position. In England, she is on alien soil; in Antigua, an island where none of the people and few of the plants are native, the soil constitutes the historic ground of her alienation. In Kincaid  s words: I come from a people with a wretched historical relationship to growing things.   However, despite that relationship, Kincaid retains a huge passion for botany and gardening  a passion that she recognizes as part of her English inheritance through conquest. Yet she turns that inheritance against itself by insisting that her botanical enthusiasms be refracted through the prism of colonial history.   
This is well illustrated by her response to an entry in the Oxford Companion of Gardens on George Clifford, the eighteenth-century Anglo-Dutch banker who built a gargantuan glasshouse,       lled with plants collected from around the world. That glasshouse proved indispensable to Linnaeus when Adam-like [he] invented modern plant nomenclature.   Kincaid observes how   
[t]he plants in [Clifford  s] glasshouse could only have come to him through  and I quote from Oxford Companion to Gardens   the in   u64258 uence of the world trade being developed by maritime powers such as the Netherlands and Great Britain.   This being a way of expressing an extraordinary historical event    trade being developed,   leaving out the nature of the trade being developed: trade in people and the things that they possessed, plants, animals, and so on  never ceases to amaze me. I do not mind the glasshouse; I do not mind the botanical garden. This is not so grand a gesture on my part. It is mostly an admission of defeat   to mind would be completely futile; I cannot do anything about it anyway. I only mind the absence of this acknowledgment: that perhaps every good thing that stands before us comes at a great cost to someone else.   
We can read Kincaid  s pained re   u64258 ections here as echoing, environmentally, Walter Benjamin  s insistence that there is no document of civilization which is not at the same time a document of barbarism.     
Given the cultural force of pastoral and wilderness mythologies, what kinds of aesthetic activism can reinsert the violence into the view? An especially powerful approach takes shape in the work of contemporary African-American painter Keith Washington. Within Our Gates: Human Sacri      ce in the American Landscape,   Washington  s series of mural-sized oil paintings, was partly prompted by responses to the  Oklahoma bombing   by talk in the American media about the arrival of domestic terrorism   on American soil. Washington sought to devise an aesthetic response that could bear witness to a history of domestic terrorism  above all, against African Americans and native peoples  that long predated Timothy McVeigh. Each of the landscape paintings from Within Our Gates   focuses on a different lynching site: these are lynching sites without ropes or mobs or dangling, mutilated men in them. The tree-lined rural and suburban scenes that Washington represents have no people in them, but beneath each bucolic painting, he has inscribed the name of the lynched man and the location. No date is given: the effect is of a violence that feels open ended, ongoing in its   
[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]   
Figure  James Sanders: Road Side Field, Bolton, MS. Oil painting by Keith Morris Washington,. Reproduced by permission of the artist/photographer.   
deep yet incomplete speci     city. The paintings feel eerily becalmed: this is domestic terrorism domesticated by pastoral convention; by national amnesia; and by the overgrowths of time, vegetation, and rezoning. From these preternaturally ordinary trees hang amnesia  s strange fruit.   
Environmentalists sometimes refer to ghost habitats,   those ecological shadows of a once powerful presence in the landscape, traces from which one can reconstruct what might otherwise appear to have vanished entirely. The term might well be adapted to Washington  s paintings: rippling through his ghost habitats are the hauntings of a double violence  the original lynching and, superimposed on that, the quiet, gradual violence of forgetting, against which the work of art pushes back.   
Washington marshals the naturalistic conventions of landscape painting, but does so with a twist. Some of his paintings have hazy distortions running through them, like exaggerated renditions of the re   u64258 ected heat that rises up from a broiling summer road. In other paintings, overlapping rectangular boxes within the view unsettle the perspective. The effect is of a double consciousness  a tranquility simultaneously expressed and exploded through an ongoing history of the present that is violently, inextricably societal and natural. To observe these paintings after reading Naipaul and Kincaid is to feel the convergent impulses behind postcolonial pastoral  s historical double take and an African-American pastoral that prompts us to see, behind some immediate bucolic calm, the domestic terrorism in the long view.   
Postcolonial Suspicion, Ecocritical Belatedness   
I have outlined some of the primary conceptual divergences between post-colonial and environmental literary studies, but we need to understand their parallel development historically as well. That history is partly internal to the university and partly to do with broader con   u64258 icts over the meaning of environmentalism in American society and in the larger world. Of particular pertinence here is Ursula Heise  s insight into why the environmental movement that burgeoned in the United States during the s was slow to reshape literary studies. Heise notes how the civil rights movement, feminism, the gay rights movement, and the Chicano/a movement all had a more immediate, powerful impact in recasting literary studies. The environmental movement, by contrast, seemed ill     tted to the emergent theoretical and pedagogical mood of the late s and s in which multicultural identity politics was transforming the literary     eld and in which, through poststructuralism  s ascent, a suspicion of holistic thinking was becoming widespread. This is a crucial insight. However, in trying to grasp the longstanding mutual indifference between environmental and postcolonial studies, one should note that a large body of postcolonial or anti-imperial work  by     gures as varied as Edward Said, Paul Gilroy, Hazel Carby, Anne McClintock, Mary Louise Pratt, Stuart Hall, Gauri Viswanathan, Ella Shohat, Benita Parry, Timothy Brennan, and Neil Lazarus  evidenced strong materialist commitments rather than distinctively poststructuralist ones. Yet apart from a rare aside, none of these in u64258 uential thinkers engaged in any depth with a socially resurgent environmentalism.   
To understand this schism more fully we need to step back from the university and consider more broadly the post  World War II power struggles within the American environmental movement  the contest over the movement  s philosophical underpinnings and policy priorities, and the way those priorities made American environmentalism a cultural and commercial phenomenon while simultaneously rendering its dominant forms anomalous relative to environmental movements evolving elsewhere, in the global South and in much of the industrialized West. The most productive approach to these developments may be to read in tandem the work of Peter Sauer and Ramachandra Guha. In a series of essays for Orion, Sauer   the most trenchant contemporary American environmental essayist  gives historical dimension to his outrage at Us. environmentalism  s path not taken, speci     cally, the way Earth Day ushered in a bio-based environmentalism, one that separated human from natural ecology.   The history of what Sauer sees as a betrayal of human ecology, however, stretches further back than that. In the wake of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a sense of global urgency informed the  meeting of the American Wilderness Society at which the members committed themselves to an expansive vision that sought to integrate America  s environmental priorities into an agenda of world peace. To that end, the Wilderness Society created a Committee on Foreign Relations chaired by Aldo Leopold.   
This internationalist outlook was derailed by President Truman  s announcement in  that Russia possessed the bomb. American internationalism became starkly militarized and, under the shadow of the cold war, American environmentalism incrementally retreated from a vision of a global human ecology premised on the notion of a viable environment as a fundamental human right. The s saw a resurgent concern with pollution and public health, largely catalyzed by Silent Spring, a concern that led to material legislative initiatives, like the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Clear Air Act, and the Clean Water Act. Yet the permanent war footing of the United States repeatedly threatened those gains. As Sauer notes, at the  International Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm, after hundreds of worldwide meetings held over four years, the delegates committed to environmental protection [as] an essential element of social and economic development.   In Western Europe and Australia in particular, public health policy became more integrally bound to environmental politics while, during that same period, the United States was traumatically focused on the divisive Vietnam War and the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy. Neither the civil rights movement nor the antiwar movement was engaged, to any signi     cant degree, by the precepts or goals of the American environmental movement. During this period, the social justice concerns enunciated so powerfully by Carson began to hive off from the nation  s environmental mainstream. The biocentric focus of the inaugural Earth Day in  exacerbated this split, leaving American environmentalism isolated from trends elsewhere and reducing the nation  s incipient environmental justice movement to (in both senses) a minority affair.   
Edward Said  s Orientalism, the most decisive text in the rise of postcolonial studies, appeared in,just two years before Ronald Reagan  s election. President Reagan oversaw, domestically, a massive rollback of environmental regulation and, internationally, proliferating cold-war con   u64258 icts from Angola and Mozambique to Nicaragua, from the Horn of Africa to Laos and El Salvador. Crucially, in terms of the postcolonial skepticism toward environmentalism that was cemented during the s, few American environmentalists showed any interest in linking Reagan  s transnational imperialism to socioenvironmental degradation in the global South. Instead, most American environmentalists became inwardly focused: on wilderness preservation, on wielding the Endangered Species Act against developers, and on saving old-growth forests. Given the domestic-cum-transcendental tenor of mainstream American environmentalism during the s, a Wilderness Society with a Committee on Foreign Relations would by then have been inconceivable. Indeed, in many instances American- and European-based international organizations, in the name of conservation, became complicit in paramilitary offensives against native peoples and their resources in the global South.   
All this made it easy for the international Left, including many postcolonialists, to view environmentalism as either irrelevant or complicit in imperialism. It also made it easy to caricature the       gure of the environmentalist as a whiter-than-white, hippy-dippy-tree-hugging-dopehead deep ecologist from an overprivileged background. Said, who in his     nal writings brie u64258  y gestured toward a green politics, for most of his career could not envisage mainstream environmentalism (as then con   gured) as an anti-imperial ally. More often  for the historical reasons outlined above  he was dismissive of environmental activism as complicit in structures of oppression and was unable to see environmentalists as playing a productive political role internationally. Although Said never addressed the matter directly, if we consider the way many deep ecologists were concocting as their philosophical ally a mishmash of Eastern   religious thought supposedly attuned to Mother Earth, that very appropriative gesture can be seen as profoundly Orientalizing  an extension into the environmental domain of the imperialist thinking Said had dissected and assailed.   
I have argued throughout this book that the notion that environmental politics are a luxury indulgence available only to the world  s wealthy  a boutique politics for the well-off  is utterly untenable. For as one of the       rst post-colonial literary critics to allude to ecological concerns, Gayatri Spivak, has noted, the local in the South directly engages global greed.   Spivak made that observation two decades after Orientalism appeared: it is a perspective remote from the dominant version of environmentalism to which Said and other postcolonial scholars were exposed in the late s and s, namely, an in-turned environmentalism preoccupied with a wilderness ethic and largely indifferent to the international relationship between social inequities, environmental practices, and the cultures of nature espoused by the poor.   
The most lapidary expos 'e9 of the drawbacks of a narrowly de     ned environmentalism appeared in Guha  s brief, yet wide-ranging  essay Radical American Environmentalism and Wilderness Preservation: A Third World Critique.   Re u64258 ecting on how traditions of ecological practices and thought in India and Germany diverged from dominant American tendencies, Guha gave the idea of environmentalism a genealogical diversity that was historically, materially grounded. Guha was alive to the range of American environmental thinking, while spelling out the baleful consequences of the hegemonic rise of deep ecology  s adherents and their scienti    c allies who anointed themselves custodians of tropical biodiversity. Together these wilderness crusaders assumed that the United States represented the environmental vanguard and that wilderness preservation  as philosophy and practice  needed to be universalized. In Roderick Nash  s blunt formulation, hopefully the less developed nations [will] eventually evolve economically and intellectually to the point where nature preservation is more than a business.   Here the purportedly sel u64258 ess biocentrism that wilderness adherents advocated surfaces as imperially anthropocentric in its America-knowsbest developmental ideology.   
Most deep ecologists evinced a shallow grasp of the consequences of transferring wholesale an environmental ideology from a supremely rich, lightly populated, overconsuming, overmilitarized society like the United States to densely populated countries (India, Nigeria, Indonesia) where signi     cant peasant communities subsisted off the land. For such communities, the idea of the wild could never be primarily a recreational counterpoint to an urban industrialized lifestyle, but was profoundly entangled with the kinds of threats I have outlined in this book: assaults from slow and direct violence on increasingly marginal ecosystems on which their livelihoods depended, ecosystems vulnerable to resource capture by transnational corporations; by third-world military, civilian, and corporate elites; and by international conservation organizations. In such peasant communities environmental sensibilities and practices existed, but they were often directly entangled with ongoing, quotidian struggles for survival.   
Together Sauer, from within the American environmental movement, and Guha, from outside it, offer a profound account of deep ecology  s dis.     guring legacy. Their critiques help clarify why postcolonial and environmental studies have, at least in the literary domain, led such largely parallel lives. Guha  s writings sharply impacted debates in environmental history, the environmental social sciences, and the biological sciences, but his ideas had very little resonance within ecocriticism, and then only belatedly. For ecocriticism only began to cohere as a     eld in the mid-s (with the appearance of Lawrence Buell  s The Environmental Imagination in  and Cheryl Glotfelty and Harold Fromm  s Ecocritical Reader in ), years after Guha  s essay had sparked controversy in other disciplines. Moreover,     rst-wave ecocriticism was skewed toward matters of genre and philosophy at the expense of environmental justice concerns, and showed scant interest in either the environmental social sciences or international environmental history. Only belatedly has environmental literary scholarship begun to broaden  and recon   gure conceptually  the parameters of the      eld in ways more accommodating of Sauer and Guha  s forceful critiques.   
Sea Changes and Tectonic Shifts   
Any lingering postcolonial dismissal of environmentalism as marginal to real   politics is belied by the proliferation of indigenous environmental movements across the global South. Saro-Wiwa was not some isolated epic hero: his actions were indicative of myriad environmental campaigns that have been locally motivated, locally led, and internationally in   u64258 ected. Indeed, we have witnessed on the environmental front something similar to the mutation of feminism, which some thirty or forty years ago was often dismissed as white, privileged, and irrelevant to the needs of third-world women. Just as we have seen what counts as feminism change radically through the rise of social movements that have decentered and diversi   ed the agendas of women  s rights (in ethnic, geographic, religious, sexuality, and class terms), so too we have seen a related turn in environmentalism, opening up paths, inside the academy and beyond, to more diverse accommodations of what counts as environmental. It is in this context that the environmental justice movement is beginning to achieve a more forceful presence within the greening of the humanities, a development that has immense consequences for our ability to engage, across multiple temporal and geographical scales, the politics of slow violence and the environmentalism of the poor.   
  All human activity,   William Beinart and Peter Coates have argued, alters the composition of the natural world which in itself is never static. A critique which regards all change as decay begs the very legitimacy of human survival.   Non-Western environmental movements are typically alert to the interdependence of human survival and environmental change in situations where the illusion of a static purity cannot be sustained, much less exalted. Such movements are also typically aware of how easily outside forces (including transnational corporations, the IMF, and the World Bank) and internal authoritarian regimes, often in cahoots with each other, can rend the delicate, always mutable mesh between cultural survival and a viable environment.   
In Ecuador, one such locally led campaign, Acci Ecolgica, mobilized the nation  s Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities against Texaco, whose ransacking of the environment echoed the plunder,  miles away, that generated Nigeria  s Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People. In India, the corporatizing of biodiversity proved a major rallying point:,Indian farmers descended on Delhi in the so-called Seed Satyagraha to protest transnational efforts to wrest control over the reproduction and distribution of seeds from traditional farmers. Wangari Maathai hailed a new environmental awareness in Africa, [as] the African people are responding to save the environment,   an overly broad judgment perhaps, but indicative of some encouraging shifts. In a voice that resonated for many Africans suffering the fallout from kleptocracy, Kenyan student leader Wycliffe Mwebi spoke of the moral right to defend the environment against a corrupt land grab.     
One productive (if insuf     cient) approach toward integrating these shifts into the environmental humanities involves narrowing the divide between the study of America  s minority literatures  a recent growth area of ecocriticism  and the study of postcolonial literatures from an environmental perspective. Lorraine Anderson et al.  s in u64258  uential collection, Literature and the Environment, evidences the potential for and problems with conjoining the two      elds. In one important regard, this is an encouraging volume  the      rst environmental anthology to include a signi    cant spread of minority writers, many of them foregrounding issues the environmental justice movement has prioritized. By acknowledging what Langston Hughes, bell hooks, Louis Owens, Clarissa Pinkola Estes, and Marilou Awiakta, among others add to environmental debate and testimony, the Anderson anthology marks a shift away from wilderness writing and the literature of Jeffersonian agrarianism. Several of the essays address indigenous land rights, community displacement, and toxicity, often in the context of urban or poor rural experience. Encouragingly, these are some of the American concerns that most readily connect with the environmental priorities that predominate in postcolonial writing. One recognizes here rich possibilities for a deepening transnational rapprochement.   
However, in helping rede     ne the      eld, Literature and the Environment (despite its expansive title) restricts itself to an almost all-American cast. Of the  contributions, only one is non-American: a maverick Wordsworth poem. So while applauding this diversi   cation of environmental literature, we should be careful not to confuse American multiculturalism with international diversity or assume the latter   u64258 ows automatically from the former. The Anderson volume leaves the need for a more global inclusiveness largely unaddressed.   
The geographical distribution of interest in Lawrence Buell  s groundbreaking study, Writing for an Endangered World: Literature, Culture, and Environment in the Us. and Beyond, raises some similar issues. Buell  s earlier and justly in   u64258  uential study, The Environmental Imagination, centered on American nature writing and was written in the shadow of Thoreau. His sequel, however, takes a more generous and creative view of what counts as environmental literature, opening up questions of toxicity, biodegradation, urban experience, and engineered environments. This enables Buell to engage, through detailed readings, a series of American minority writers: Gwendolyn Brooks, John Edgar Wideman, Richard Wright, and Linda Hogan among them.   
However, the expanded American diversity of Buell  s later work is not matched by an attentiveness to diversity elsewhere. The limitations of trying to generate a transnational vision from an American-centered account of environmental writing becomes evident in Buell  s solitary sustained reading of a postcolonial        ction, Mahasweta Devi  s Pterodactyl, Puran Sahay, and Pirtha,   a Bengali novella translated into English by Spivak. After praising Pterodactyl   as a trenchant     ction of environmental justice, Buell remarks that the novella  s sometimes esoteric cultural particularismmay seem to make it an odd detour from the Us.-focused texts I have mainly been discussing.   The image of a detour   and the reference to esoteric cultural particularism   foreground the intellectual challenge for ecocriticism of moving beyond a center-periphery model. The unsettling implication is that somehow American texts transcend cultural particularism,   are always already universalized in ways that postcolonial ones are not.   
What is required is more than simply diversifying the canon: we need to reimagine the prevailing paradigms. That much is evident from the enormous dif     culty Saro-Wiwa had in gaining an audience in the United States and Europe. When he     rst appealed to Greenpeace representatives they said they didn  t work in Africa, that it was off their environmental map. Wherever he went, Saro-Wiwa was treated as an unfathomable anomaly. An African writer claiming to be an environmentalist? And claiming, moreover, that his people  s human rights were being violated by environmental ethnocide? Part of Saro-Wiwa  s problem in gaining a hearing for the Ogoni was not just economic and political  it was imaginative as well.   
Saro-Wiwa campaigned for environmental justice. But he also campaigned, in effect, against a center-periphery paradigm. He had to contend not just with environmental racism but with prejudicial failures of geographical imagining. In American intellectual and media terms, a region like Ogoniland is almost completely unimaginable. Yet the writings of Saro-Wiwa, Devi, and Roy allow us (in crucial ways that the self-perpetuating national lineage of Thoreau, Muir, Abbey, Berry, and Snyder does not) to engage environmental politics through con   u64258 icts between subnational micro-minorities, autocratic nation states, and transnational macroeconomic powers.   
In trying to diversify our thinking, we need to insure that we don  t end up asking an environmental variant of Saul Bellow  s dismissive question: Where is the Zulu Tolstoy?   If we go scouting the equatorial forests for the Timorese Thoreau (or his Cameroonian cousin), we  ll return alone. Nor can we content ourselves with a nominal international smattering  an Ishimure Michiko or Wordsworth text decorating the American eco-canon much as a Virginia Woolf or a Jane Austen once graced otherwise all-male courses and, later, a Toni Morrison or an Alice Walker were used to diversify   white courses on women  s writing.   
To reject an add-on solution to the challenges of diversity is to refuse a vision of environmentalism as invented at the center and exported to (or imposed upon) the periphery. Such center-periphery thinking has been, historically, both a source of postcolonialists   pervasive indifference to environmentalism and, conversely, a source of the debilitating strain of superpower parochialism that lingers even now among many American ecocritics and writers. Just as subaltern studies embarked on a project of provincializing the West, so too we need to persist in provincializing American environmentalism if we are to regenerate and diversify the        eld.   
By the same measure, postcolonial studies could bene     t from an infusion of the regenerative public urgency that a   u64258 exible, broadly imagined environmentalism can offer. Postcolonial studies has recently begun to stall for several reasons, four in particular. First, an involuted turn toward an abstruse prose accessible only to disciplinary initiates severed much post-colonial work from the public, communicative ambitions that, at its best, had provided much of the     eld  s anti-imperial dynamism. Second, post  cold war and pre-/, issues of empire fell out of favor in the United States and, for many, became less pressing. As those issues resurfaced after the onset of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, a new generation of younger scholars was   on account of that historical hiatus  unacquainted, in any textured way, with the anti-imperial work produced during the cold war. Third, especially since /, in public policy debates and literary studies we have witnessed a paradigmatic shift toward globalization and world literature, respectively. As I  ve documented in this book, globalization  s ascendancy, as process and paradigm, has led to some inspirational, if embattled transnational alliances among activists opposed to its neoliberal modes, not least among activists promulgating a grassroots transnationalism from below. My stance on the rise of world literary studies is ambivalent, as I intimated in my introduction. On the one hand, we have witnessed a heartening, necessary engagement by literary scholars with languages and literatures neglected by hidebound comparative literature departments; we have witnessed, too, some intriguing conceptual innovations. On the other hand, there is a powerful strain of world literary studies that, in its obsession with      eld de   nition, seems content with a campus-niche orientation: as such, it feels politically bloodless and, paradoxically, unworldly. Which brings us to the fourth, related reason for postcolonialism  s relative retreat: together, the rise of world literary studies and the rise of the pro-globalization public intellectual have allowed many universities to phase out (or greatly reduce) their hiring and course offerings in postcolonial studies as a purportedly superannuated      eld. This would concern me less if I did not suspect this as being symptomatic of a broader scaling back within the humanities and the social sciences of the kind of radicalism that anti-imperial and postcolonial work often enabled.   
A radically creative alliance between environmental and postcolonial studies can help push back against administrative and disciplinary efforts to corral for narrow ends what scholars alive to the power of word and story have to offer the wider world. What we can offer includes a belief in the value of multiple publics as we strive, among other things, to foster imaginative coalitions that may help redress environmental injustice.   
Six years ago, in addressing the concerns laid out in this chapter, I wrote (as did Susie O  Brien and Graham Huggan) about the conceptual and political value of instilling in postcolonial studies a stronger environmental awareness. I noted, for instance, the value of recon     guring Black Atlantic studies in environmental terms beginning with Derek Walcott  s aphoristic assertion: the sea is history.   I also argued for more inventive transnational comparative work, by bringing into conversation, say, the rich literatures about nuclear colonialism and nuclear risk from the Paci    c island nations, Australia, Britain, the United States, India, Pakistan, and those areas of the former Soviet Union still shadowed by the slow violence of the test zone. Crucially, I argued that we needed to rethink what it is we are looking for  what kinds of texts, what kinds of issues  when we engage transnational environmental literatures.   
At the end of the twenty-     rst century  s     rst decade, we are witnessing, across a range of intellectual fronts, some heartening initiatives that are starting to change hitherto dominant conceptions of what it might mean to green the humanities. We are witnessing the beginnings not just of an environmentally engaged Black Atlantic studies but also of Indian Ocean and Paci   c Ocean studies animated by conjoined ecological and post-colonial concerns. Comparative nuclear literary studies is generating high-caliber work, and we are seeing energetic new inquiry into the literatures of resource extraction across a range of geographies. Caribbean environmental studies has emerged as a particularly fertile domain of interdisciplinary inquiry. And as I write, the     rst anthology to bridge the African environmental humanities and social sciences is going to press, as are the     rst two anthologies of postcolonial environmental scholarship. New books engaging, from an environmental stance, areas as diverse as Indian     ction, Australian and Paci   c literatures, and the African novel are breaking new ground methodologically as well.   
This current of emergent work reminds us that there is no inherent incompatibility between postcolonial and environmental literary studies, despite their discrete institutional histories. However, one caveat is in order. It is tempting to return to in   u64258 uential anticolonial thinkers like Fanon, C 'e9saire, Kenyatta, and Said to unearth overlooked environmental concerns seaming through their work. While there is value in doing so, we should not forget the historical circumstances that, almost without exception, made such thinkers hostile or indifferent to environmentalists and vice versa. There is a risk of retro    tting   u64258 exible contemporary meanings of environmentalism anachronistically to earlier eras when anticolonial struggles over land rights and political independence clashed, again and again, with colonial legacies of conservation that were invariably racist and became emblematic of environmentalism in a decolonizing age. The prospects for postcolonial environmentalism today have been empowered by a spreading awareness among diverse international publics that ecological concerns are not only gaining urgency but are also less narrowly de   ned than even a decade ago  certainly less so than when Orientalism     rst made its mark or, sixteen years before that, The Wretched of the Earth. Crucially, the current, belated engagement between environmental and postcolonial literary studies does not result from a straightforward two-way conversation but is part of a broader series of dynamic exchanges, two of which warrant mentioning in particular. First, the transnational turn in American Studies, whether hemispheric or more broadly global, is achieving an unprecedented methodological and curricular authority. Such work, while of course not wholly new, is becoming a primary catalyst for energizing American studies, creating an intellectual climate in which questions of empire, globalization, and transnational structures of power and resistance are moving front and center. This has clear environmental repercussions: it has the potential to shift the intellectual centers of gravity away from the in-turned, American exceptionalist tendencies of wilderness literature and Jeffersonian agrarianism and toward more diverse environmental approaches that are, crucially, more compatible with the impulses underpinning environmental justice movements around the world. Here Camille Dungy  s  anthology, Black Nature. Four Centuries of African American Nature Poetry, marks a breakthrough initiative, in its historical reach, its transnational resonances, its engagement with urban environmental literature, and its concern with the outer and inner landscapes of injustice.   
A second, related shift in the intellectual climate of the environmental humanities is emerging from within Native American studies. Native texts have, by now, a well-established history of ecocritical engagement. What is novel and striking, however, is the gathering interest among Native scholars in taking up postcolonial studies as a potentially productive interlocutor. This turn becomes a second way of deterritorializing American studies by advancing comparative approaches to settler colonialism, land rights, environmental racism, resource con   u64258  icts, and the transnational circuits of toxicity while drawing on (and recon   guring) postcolonial studies. Crucially, from an environmental perspective the emergent dialogue between Native studies and postcolonialism can help foreground the socioenvironmental relations between internal colonialisms and offshore imperialisms in all their historical and geographical variability. This postcolonial-Native turn thus helps further unsettle the dominant paradigms of American environmental literature and criticism while widening the potential avenues for comparative work around environmental justice on a global front.   
Together these emerging tendencies in postcolonial, American, and Native studies can help deepen and diversify the dialogue I have sought to outline here, reframing oppositions between bioregionalism and cosmopolitanism, between transcendentalism and transnationalism, between an ethics of place and the experience of displacement. Through such a dialogue we can simultaneously think through nature-induced states of transport and the vast, brutal history of humans forcibly transported. In the process, we can aspire to a more historically answerable and geographically expansive sense of what constitutes our environment and which literary works we entrust to voice its parameters. Despite the recent advances toward that goal, ours remains an ongoing, ambitious, and crucial task  not least because for the foreseeable future, literature departments are likely to remain in   u64258  uential players in the greening of the humanities.   
 
Epilogue   
Scenes from the Seabed: The Future of Dissent   
For God  s sake, be economical with your lamps and candles! Not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of man  s blood was spilled for it.   
  Herman Melville, Moby-Dick   
The island of Atlantis, according to Plato, vanished into the ocean in a single day and night of misfortune.    The engulfment threatening the Maldive Islands is nothing as unambiguously instantaneous as that. The Maldives face an incremental threat from rising, warming oceans, a threat dif     cult to dramatize and even harder to arrest  a form of slow violence that is rapid in geological terms but (unlike a tsunami) not fast enough to constitute breaking news. In an effort to infuse dramatic urgency into this incremental crisis, the president of the Maldives, Mohamed Nasheed, held an extraordinary underwater cabinet meeting in diving gear on October, shortly before the Copenhagen Climate Summit. President Nasheed and his wetsuit-clad ministers convened behind a conference table anchored to the seabed, a Maldive   u64258 ag planted behind them. Oxygen mask in place, the president signed into law a national commitment to becoming carbon neutral within ten years.   
President Nasheed  s underwater convocation speaks directly to this book  s concern with the environmentalism of the poor and the representational challenges posed by slow violence. The Maldive meeting was an explicit bid to turn the slow-motion urgency of a nation  s fate into a newsworthy event and, beyond that, into a symbolic prompt to goad world leaders in Copenhagen to act against climate change. The subaqueous cabinet meeting put an apocalyptic spin on the global dithering of business as usual: this was drowning in paperwork with a vengeance. We can read the scene as an attempt to surmount two vexing dilemmas. First, how does a nation under climatic threat compensate for the drama de     cit of climate change? Second, how does a minnow nation like the Maldives  which has contributed almost zero to global warming and has zero clout on the world stage   conjure enough agency to render visible the slow violence that poses an existential threat to it through inundation, through a terminal sea change?   
This ghostly sea-bottom scene makes a statement  at once micronational and planetary  about environmental time. What we enter through photographs and video is a premonitory landscape pre      guring the consequences,   
[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]   
Figure  Maldives underwater cabinet meeting to highlight the threat of global warming, October ,. Reproduced by permission of the Maldives government media agency.   
on a global scale, of wasted foreknowledge. The scene serves as a preview of the aftermath.   
The Maldives are not wealthy: the nation, assembled from twenty-six coral atolls, had a per capita GDP in  of $,. In terms of population and land mass, the archipelago constitutes Asia  s most diminutive nation, a place of precarious postcolonial possibility doubly compromised by smallness and by its status as the planet  s lowest-lying nation-state. The Maldives boast a land mass of only  square miles (about. times the size of Washington, DC) but possess a disproportionately long coastline that stretches for  miles. The capital, Male, also happens to be one of the planet  s most densely populated cities. This con   u64258 uence of factors  low altitude; high population density; a long, threatened coastline made more vulnerable by a dying protective barrier of coral reefs; and ironically, a tourist trade as a paradise untouched by time  have combined to turn the Maldives into the canary in the mine shaft of the climate crisis.   
Through the compensatory realm of symbolic activism, President Nasheed sought to distill a narrative of planetary urgency from a crisis so attritional and so seemingly far-off that it might appear a causeless threat to an already invisible nation of no apparent consequence. But for Nasheed, like Saro-Wiwa before him, human rights are indissociable from environmental justice for a marginalized community that doubles as the bellwether of a broader crisis in transnational responsibility.   
The Maldives is on the brink of becoming the       rst nation where the entire population would be climate refugees; even with a mere,citizens, the prospect of a climate-driven exodus on that scale constitutes a logistical nightmare and foreshadows an age of insurgent climate refugees on a far more threatening, chaotic scale. Indeed, a  Pentagon report warned of the security threat posed by millions of climate refugees, predicting that rich nations like the United States would have to respond by building defensive fortresses around their countries.   This conventional neoliberal response   wall off the wealthy, raise the walls of denial  is classic short-termism, a security strategy built on the illusory, foundational assumption that addressing the causes of slow violence can be in   nitely deferred.   
The Maldives may be at the forefront of the crisis, but it is not alone: at the  Cancun climate talks  island nations announced that they face the end of history   if the rich countries fail to act decisively and in concert against climate change. Those  comprise the Alliance of Small Nation Island States  AOSIS, which sounds like a jumbled oasis, paradise thrown askew. The fate of the AOSIS nations foreshadows the looming, long-term threat to wealthier seaside cities everywhere, from Manhattan to China  s coastal plains, from Venice and Rotterdam to New Orleans, and to the cities that hug Australia  s shores  where  percent of the national population clings to the oceanic perimeter.   
President Nasheed  s underwater cabinet meeting offers an image of reverse inundation that speaks directly to the environmentalism of the poor. Here it  s not brown immigrants threatening to swamp   the neoliberal fortresses of the still predominantly white rich, but rather poor brown people confronting the threat of having their national territory swamped as a result of a -year experiment in hydrocarbon-fueled capitalism whose historic bene     ciaries have been disproportionately rich and white. This image strikes at the heart of the debate over climate justice, at the inequities between those who have grown rich off hydrocarbon culture and the predominantly poor people  from the Maldives to Niger  who are low-level hydrocarbon consumers but at greatest initial risk from the climate crisis. Yet over time, that risk will be passed on, as today  s imperiled islanders turn into climate refugees whose desperation will exacerbate the crisis in the richer, high-consumption nations whose pro u64258 igacy triggered it in the     rst place.   
Before the climate crisis,     u64258 ag planting was associated more with mountain peaks than with ocean   u64258 oors. (Flag planting, one suspects, was not a historically prominent activity in the Maldives, which boast a highest peak of seven feet and seven inches  one inch taller than Yao Ming). The Maldivian   u64258 ag planted at the underwater cabinet meeting is a   u64258 ag of involuntary conquest, a territorial marker not of national ascent but of national decline, as a nation-state subsides toward obliteration.   
Without the compensatory agency that media images of the meeting bestowed on it, the Maldivian     u64258 ag would have been left to   u64258  ap invisibly underwater in the Indian Ocean currents. Yet I cannot observe this submerged   u64258 ag of inverted conquest without thinking of a second submerged   u64258 ag that might seem unrelated, yet speaks to the planetary feedback loop between the slow violence of the climate crisis and our transnational failure to begin to innovate and conserve our way beyond unsustainable levels of hydrocarbon dependency. In,two years before the Maldivian cabinet assembled underwater, a Russian submarine descended to the seabed beneath the North Pole and planted a Russian   u64258 ag. This   u64258  ag planting marked a very different, less ironic oceanic land grab. Russian expedition leader Artur Chilingarov declared: [T]he Arctic is Russian.   Denmark immediately disputed the Kremlin  s claim to the Arctic continental shelf, as did Canada. Russia dispatched troop reinforcements to its Arctic edge, while Canada declared it would follow suit and was strengthening its claim by building a new Arctic port city. The United States, Norway, and the European Union (whose member states Sweden, Denmark, and Finland abut the Arctic) climbed into the controversy with claims of their own.   
Global warming was the trigger for this militant rhetoric and these troop movements. Melting circumpolar pack ice had opened the prospect of new sea-lanes and was exposing hitherto inaccessible mineral and energy deposits, especially gas and oil, the so-called Arctic hydrocarbon bonanza. On May, Science magazine made publicly accessible for the       rst time a comprehensive map of the projected circumpolar energy reserves, indicating that the region  s oceans might harbor  percent of the world  s unexploited gas deposits and  percent of its unexploited oil. The oil majors and their political cheerleaders hailed the melting of the fragile circumpolar pack ice in a frontier idiom, capitalizing on the back-to-the-future mythic appeal of the Northwestern Passage.   
And so we face the prospect of expanded suboceanic carbon reserves being extracted and burned courtesy of global warming, accelerating the very processes of slow violence that will drown the Maldives       rst but which, unchecked, will ultimately breach the walls that concretize our planetary delusion that we can segregate secure communities from insecure ones long term, and separate out orderly societies from those abandoned to destitution and climate chaos. From the perspective of climatic slow violence, the Arctic oil rush gives a whole new meaning to the race to the bottom.   
The two     u64258 ags in these far- u64258 ung underwater scenes may be geographically remote from each other yet serve, as it were, as carbon copies of a common crisis. Together they remind us that the climate crisis is both indivisible and unevenly felt, experienced  especially by some of the planet  s most vulnerable peoples  as climate injustice. One seabed scene, beneath a disappearing ice pack, serves as a starting gun for the twenty-   rst-century scramble by global behemoths to grab even more of the earth  s resources in another giant colonial carve-up. The other underwater scene, beneath a vanishing island nation, gives an oceanic environmental twist to the anticolonial phrase the development of underdevelopment.     
Greenwashing and Big Oil Transcendentalism   
We can read these two seabed scenes  the Arctic     u64258 ag annexing new hydrocarbon claims, the tropical   u64258 ag protesting a short-sighted hydrocarbon addiction  alongside a third, connected scene: the submerged slow violence triggered by the mile-deep blowout beneath the Deepwater Horizon rig. The idiom of new frontiers has long been integral to BP  s public relations spin: in the corporation  s insistence, for instance, that it is at the cutting edge of the energy frontier,   exhibit A the deepest well ever drilled by the oil and gas industry.   This exuberant frontier idiom is of a piece with BP  s Big Oil transcendentalism, evident in the greenwashing slogan Beyond Petroleum   and in the clashing perceptual     elds of Deepwater Horizon (down below stretches up ahead). Despite the airy transcendentalism of BP  s slogan, according to the Atlas Economic Research Foundation BP spent less investing in solar, hydrogen, and wind energy over a six-year period than it did on a two-year advertising campaign to rebrand itself as Beyond Petroleum.    And so the post-carbon, transcendental vision thing is largely reducible to a self-referential marketing metanarrative. BP did, however,     nd plenty of funds to help bankroll the Global Climate Coalition, a consortium of mainly Big Oil and Big Auto corporations that opposed Us. rati    cation of the Kyoto Protocol to lower greenhouse emissions.   
BP has long sought to exploit the romance of the technological sublime  imagining the unimaginable, venturing into the unknown, con     dent that some engineering breakthrough will save the day. The frisson of the technological frontier wins hands down against more prosaic, unnewsworthy stories of steady regulatory oversight. President Obama himself notoriously bought into this technological progress narrative when, three weeks before Deepwater Horizon went down in   u64258  ames, he vindicated exposing formerly protected coastal areas to offshore drilling with the assurance that oil rigs today generally don  t cause spills. They are technologically very advanced.   In these terms, the bold advances are material but the unwise risks immaterial. Washington commentator Llewellyn King took the language of the technological sublime to its hubristic extreme when, in the explosion  s aftermath, he could still express wonder that we can build machines so remarkable that they can lift the lid off the underworld.     
That infernal, unlidded underworld let loose what the Keats epigraph to Silent Spring foreshadowed: The sedge is wither  d from the lake, / And no birds sing.   To read those words is to picture the Louisiana wetlands: the withered marsh grass and the oil-silenced pelicans, robbed of voice and     u64258 ight, their slimed wings giving them the appearance of evolution sent into reverse, as if these were the very     rst birds struggling to extract themselves from the primordial ooze. And thus the pelicans, like the Exxon Valdez sea otters, became traumatic, charismatic stand-ins for a microbial and cellular catastrophe whose temporal and physical dimensions we are ill equipped to imagine and the science of which we do not adequately understand.   
In the twenty-     rst century, we have crossed over into what Michael Klare calls the Age of Tough Oil. As easily accessible reserves are exhausted, new     nds entail heightened extractive costs and heightened environmental risks; ocean wells become ever deeper, and we become more dependent on horrendously polluting tar sand petroleum and fracking. Together, the costs exacted by Tough Oil and the Deepwater crisis ought to be incentives enough to encourage investment in cleaner alternatives to the hydrocarbon status quo, yet only a few farsighted nations  like Germany, Portugal, and Denmark  are making this switch on the necessary scale. Instead, within weeks of the Macondo wellhead being sealed, Greenland launched the next phase of the Arctic frontier oil rush by issuing new drilling licenses in far deeper, far colder waters than the Gulf, conditions under which oil would be even more resistant to dispersal.   
In the Age of Tough Oil, the regulatory climate in the United States has grown more lax so that, as in the Gulf, we were left to watch s shallow water cleanup technology being applied to a twenty-     rst-century deepwater catastrophe. We cannot reduce the conjoined crisis of environmental imagination and policy overhaul to something as simple as Republicans versus Democrats. The Obama administration is recapitulating the regulatory laxity that marked its Republican predecessors: critically, it was in  that Obama  s Interior Ministry granted BP a categorical exemption from a comprehensive environmental impact statement for Deepwater Horizon  s Macondo wellhead. And it was President Bill Clinton who, to appease the oil majors, rushed through the Deepwater Royalty Reduction Act of,which accelerated deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico by reducing fees on oil and gas production. A year later, the Clinton administration, at the request of the industry,   halved the frequency with which blowout preventers needed to be tested. Clinton  s rationale for such deregulation? Reducing dependence on foreign oil.   
Thus we continue, decade after decade, to seesaw between two narrowly de     ned de   nitions of risk: the risk of relying on foreign oil and the risk of domestic drilling. What remains interminably deferred is the third option: increasing neither domestic nor foreign risk but investing, on a transformative scale, in post-hydrocarbon possibilities (what Beyond Petroleum gestures toward only in name). This should be the long-term focus of our risk management, an alternative option that holds out job-generating possibilities to boot.   
Deepwater and the Lost Horizons of Slow Violence   
Ours is an age of shape-shifting transnational corporations; of heightened corporate mobility; of megamergers; of disappearing problematic brand names like Union Carbide and Monsanto; and of acrostic subcontracting that can make it hard to nail down a corporate identity, let alone nail down blame. Against this bewildering backdrop, how does one ring-fence damage and culpability? President Obama initially tried to put the genie of neoliberal globalization back in the bottle of corporate nationalism through the populist ploy of calling BP, anachronistically, British Petroleum: the UK as historic oppressor turned rogue nation. Tony Hayward  s British-accented, hyperdefensive, litigation-minded, tone-deaf performance created a ready way of focalizing the enemy  his ruddy face becoming a stand in for foreign   business practices endangering American shores. Faced with the challenges of demarcating blame, the Republicans found themselves impaled on a symptomatic dilemma: was the enemy Big Government or Great Britain? Some in the Tea Party wing  like Rep. Joe Barton (R-Texas), who apologized to Tony Hayward for the $ billion shakedown    accused the federal government of meddling in places government didn  t belong; others relished the chance to     u64258 ex their xenophobic instincts, revamping the iconography of tea-dumping anti-imperialism a la.   
In the twenty-     rst century, drawing a line between domestic and foreign corporations is assuming an increasingly arcane complexity. BP is a London-based     rm, but one that the Pentagon depends on for  percent of its oil. Americans hold  percent of BP shares. The feedback loop between government and the oil majors is intense: Gale Norton, for example, George   
W. Bush  s Secretary for the Interior and point person for a massive wave of oil industry deregulation, is now a paid advisor to that most un-American sounding of the oil majors, Royal Dutch Shell.   
How foreign is the foreign? This question bears directly on the way complex corporate complicities are outsourced and consumer complicities disowned. The question also impacts the way ostensibly foreign disasters get excised from a nationalized memory, the lessons they have to offer dissipated because they don  t appear to jeopardize our   environment or our   national security. Disasters bracketed as foreign can be dismissed as irrelevant to policy overhaul or industry oversight.   
The  Ixtoc oil explosion off the Gulf of Mexico  s coast is a classic instance of the problematically nationalized boundaries of disaster memory. Ixtoc remains the most pertinent precursor to Deepwater Horizon, far more so than any oil disaster within Us. borders: Ixtoc occurred in the Gulf of Mexico, the same body of water as Deepwater Horizon; it was an uncapped spill that kept gushing for months; it occurred under warm water conditions; and unlike most oil disasters, it involved a deepwater well rather than emanating from a ruptured tanker or a land spill. Yet if the  Santa Barbara and  Exxon Valdez spills are hazy enough in American memory, the Ixtoc blowout simply doesn  t register.   
The most striking parallel between Ixtoc and Deepwater is this: it took Pemex, the oil company responsible,  days of futile experimentation and clueless passivity before the Ixtoc spill ran its course, by which stage the company had managed to drill two relief wells. During those months of serial incompetence,  million gallons of crude spewed into the Gulf, destroying (among other things) a venerable       shing culture which, along with keystone species of marine life, has never fully recovered. Deepwater drilling today is much deeper than it was in the s. But the crucial unlearned lesson remains: in pushing back the technological frontiers of oil extraction, the industry thirty years ago had, and still has, little motivation for making comparable advances in blowout prevention and cleanup technology. The standard operating procedure remains: it  s cheaper for us to improvise when stuff happens  wetlands, deltas, marine life, tourist, and     shing industries be damned.   
The unlearned lessons from Ixtoc call into question the line hewed by disaster optimists  engineers like Henry Petroski, David W. Fowler, and James R. Chiles  whose ideas have gained renewed prominence in Deepwater  s aftermath. For Fowler, who teaches forensic engineering at the University of Texas, Austin, the [oil] industry knows it can  t have that happen again. It  s going to make sure history doesn  t repeat itself.   To the contrary, as Ixtoc suggests, one tenacious industry strategy is to wait (it doesn  t take too long) for history, especially ostensibly foreign history, to go away.   
Part of the problem is that disaster optimists are typically engineers who take a narrowly technological perspective, observing only how disaster can drive design. But unless the political climate under which innovative design operates is subject to an environmental justice overhaul, such innovations will have limited effect or indeed never be implemented. Without political pressure or quick pro     tability, what is there to motivate corporate will? And whenever (as with Deepwater Horizon) a corporation like Halliburton is involved, can what Naomi Klein has trenchantly called disaster capitalism   be far behind?   
If the temporal horizons of the disaster zone are, on a number of fronts, dif     cult to keep in view, that dif   culty was exacerbated in the Gulf of Mexico by BP  s strategy of dousing the spill with the oil dispersant Corexit. Corexit sounds like a      rst cousin of Tippex, one brush stroke away from a simple whiteout, a fresh chance to rewrite past mistakes. But with a runaway gusher there is no simple corrective stroke and no exit. Corexit is so far from a problem solver that it is banned in the UK; the evidence suggests the product will operate less as a dispersant than (in Rachel Carson  s term) a biocide. So in addressing the slow violence in the Gulf of Mexico we return to the vanishing acts performed by a name: Agent Orange as herbicide   that continues to poison down the generations; cluster bombs   that disperse their staggered casualties across the years; Corexit   that through tide and wave action, ocean currents, and chemical diffusion, compounds a calamity it purports to redress.   
In her investigative reporting on the Gulf oil catastrophe, Anne McClintock learned that BP and the Coast Guard were secretly deploying large numbers of military planes to carpet bomb the spill with Corexit by night. The oil would disperse and sink, only later to reaccumulate. So the appearance and disappearance took on a certain rhythm: the mass spraying of Corexit occurred mostly under cover of night, effectively disappearing much of the surface oil, which did not vanish but merely dispersed and sank beneath the water to the sea bed or accumulated in underwater plumes. Thus the oil dispersant operated as an image dispersant: as McClintock observes, it was a way of disappearing the story.   By dissipating the slicks without actually removing the oil from the ecosystems, BP was able to soften the imagery of disaster  as it had sought to do by Photoshopping oil slick images on its Web site and, as McClintock documents, by barring (with the Coast Guard  s complicity) the media from accessing the worst-hit areas. With slow violence in general, I have suggested, the temporal projections of disaster are routinely foreshortened; in the Gulf of Mexico that foreshortening was given a head start by the application of an image emollient   
Hydrocarbon  s Black Atlantic   
The slow violence that underlies Deepwater Horizon long predates the out-of-control gusher. The temporal dimensions of the disaster zone must include a long history of successive administrations lavishing on Big Oil exemptions from regulation. The unseen violence of unregulated drilling has become institutionalized through a culture of encouraging the oil majors to oversee themselves, creating a direct connection between failed government oversight, corporate short-sightedness, and unseen violence-inthe-making. In tracking the temporal deep horizons of this scene we should include the attritional, exponential carbon-culture violence perpetrated by the oil majors in impoverished communities of the global South, a violence that, located offshore among the foreign poor, doesn  t garner the media attention granted the Gulf of Mexico.   
In questioning the environmental parameters of the foreign,   it is helpful to consider, in transatlantic conjunction, two of Earth  s greatest, most vulnerable delta wetlands  the Mississippi and the Niger. In Nigeria  s southeastern delta states    which satisfy  percent of American oil needs   million gallons of oil have spilled to date. But those spills have occurred during       ve decades of drilling: Niger Delta communities have suffered the equivalent of an Exxon-Valdez sized spill annually for a half century.   
This enduring, incremental disaster, however, has lacked a focal,        ery, news-grabbing explosion  and a spillcam. Superimposed on these representational disadvantages is the impediment of a racialized foreignness: the Nigerian spills, from an American or European perspective, are offshoreoffshore  doubly removed from national consciousness. To grasp this discrepancy we need to recognize the racialized dimensions both to Ulrich Beck  s observation that pollution follows the poor   and to Fernando Coronil  s account of the international division of nature.     
On this score, we should widen our purview beyond Big Oil to include the comparative       eld of North-South disaster liability. To Bhopal, for example, where, as in the Gulf of Mexico, disaster resulted from regulatory laxity, a laissez-faire culture of corporate self-policing, corner cutting on equipment maintenance and elementary safety procedures and a corporate management that ignored or stonewalled warnings from employees and intrepid journalists that a catastrophe was in the making.   
Deep Horizon killed eleven people instantly, whereas Bhopal killed,instantly and thousands more in the months thereafter. According to Indian government records, the Union Carbide disaster adversely affected the health of,people. The Us. Congress swiftly exacted from BP a pledge to ring-fence an initial $ billion, with a projected compensation of $ billion. Compensation could be claimed for, among other things, death, personal injury, environmental cleanup, public health concerns, property damage, lost jobs, and lost income. By contrast, in Bhopal the kind of damage subject to compensation was severely circumscribed: only death or personal injury counted. Moreover, after compensation the factory disaster site continues to in   u64258 ict casualties: Dow (which bought out Union Carbide) still has not cleaned up  tons of hazardous waste that continues to leach into the city  s aquifers and soil.   
However inadequate the billions of compensation directed at the Gulf of Mexico, the Us. administration could leverage its power against BP, whereas the Indian government found itself in a weak bargaining position in relation to a Us.-based corporation. The Reagan administration  and subsequent administrations  made clear that future Us. investment in India would be jeopardized if Union Carbide were penalized in the ways that the Bhopal Survivors   Movement and myriad Indians demanded. Successively cowed (and corrupt) Indian governments scaled back their demands, allowing the courts to go through the motions, decade after decade, without exacting material compensation. Union Carbide eventually paid out a tri   u64258 ing $ million to the victims, who received an average $ lifetime compensation  and then only after seventeen years of haggling. Poor brown lives in the global South can be capped at a low dollar amount.   
In June,with the Macondo well still gushing, the Obama administration was in negotiations to provide nuclear technology for power stations in India. A new civil nuclear technology agreement between the United States and India would depend, they insisted, on capping damage liability. The United States, with one eye on the Bhopal disaster, demanded that the Indians agree in advance to a maximum $ million liability in the event of a nuclear industrial accident. So at the very moment that the Obama administration was retrospectively overriding the damage limits to which BP was contractually accountable, it was strong-arming the Indians into capping damage limits at. per cent of the initial amount ring-fenced for BP compensation. Thus does the precautionary principle operate on the unequal playing       eld of neoliberal liability between the global North and global South.   
From Deepwater to The Shallows: The Future of Dissent   
When a quarter century ago Edward Said urged intellectuals to master both long forms of writing and shorter, prompt interventions, he could not have anticipated either the hegemonic brevity or incessant promptness that would come to dominate contemporary communications. (Welcome to the world, the text, and the critic in  characters or less.) Nor could Rachel Carson, with her innovative metaphoric fondness for a planetary web of life,   have anticipated how future environmentalists would have at their       ngertips a Worldwide Web seething with virtual ecologies of connection and distraction.   
In an age that increasingly genu   u64258 ects to the digital divinity of speed, how will environmental activists negotiate the representational challenges of slow violence  a violence that is by de   nition image weak and demanding on attention spans? How will writers, photographers, video artists, podcasters, and bloggers navigate the possibilities  and possible perils  opened up by a new media culture characterized both by extensive, instant connectivity and by impatient, distractive staccato rhythms? How will we distribute and maintain our attention over the longue duree as we seek to extend and sustain the pathways to environmental justice on a transnational scale?   
Seven weeks after the Macondo wellhead blew, I found myself thinking about such matters in a state of symptomatic, oscillating simultaneity, my gaze     u64258 ickering between the Deep Horizon spillcam and The Shallows, Nick Carr  s thoughtful,     ercely debated analysis of neuroplasticity, depth of concentration, and community under the pressures of the digital age. Carr, marshaling an array of scienti   c evidence, expresses concern over the way the new media are altering our neural pathways, impeding our capacity for undivided attention and, while expanding access to data, simultaneously shrinking our power to consolidate memories. These neural changes have immense repercussions, he suggests, for selfhood and social amnesia.   
I had just       nished The Shallows when BP sealed the wellhead and there was supposedly nothing left to watch: the most visible phase of the disaster was over. At that point, the mainstream media scaled back decisively their reporting on the spill. I felt profoundly troubled by the image management involved. Yes, the spillcam had allowed us collectively to witness the irruptive trauma and mobilize around what we could see. But with the wellhead sealed I knew that attention spans  unanchored by visible evidence of catastrophe  would drift elsewhere. Meanwhile the incalculable, incremental damage spread through biomagni   cation of the toxins was only beginning. BP had not just capped the wellhead but, with the spillcam  s assistance, had capped the disaster  s perceived time frame as well. Powerful forces  including the Obama administration and the New York Times, which wanted to put the disaster behind them ahead of the midterms  were highly motivated to declare that the worst was over and move on.   
It was in the context of Deep Horizon, then, that I found myself giving my reading of Nick Carr  s The Shallows an environmental slant. Environmentalism is extraneous to Carr  s concern with the changes to neural pathways, memory patterns, and identity induced by the digital age. Yet his approach is deeply and directly pertinent to the issues that have animated this book: how we perceive and inhabit environmental time; how we render visible, and act against, attritional slow violence that jeopardizes sustainable security, locally, nationally, and on a planetary scale. If, in the judgment of psychologist Christopher Chabris, the Web intensi     es our tendency to vastly overvalue what happens to us right now   how do we balance that restless drive for immediate novelty with activism that needs to remain focused on the long term? How in an age characterized by chronic digital drift do we stay attentive to toxic drift that unfolds across a radically different time span? Crucially, what is the relationship between mobilizing dissent against the hydrocarbon status quo and the changing technological climate in which such activism must operate, a climate that is dramatically overturning how time is lived and perceived?   
The challenges of sustaining urgency in a digital age are particularly acute in relation to climate change, given the temporal and geographical dimensions of the problem. Earth scientists may be alarmed by what they call the Great Acceleration  the speeded up, anthropogenically driven changes to Earth  s biophysical systems since World War II  but most people, especially in our Age of Distraction, don  t understand rapidity the way earth scientists do. The new media have expanded public access to climate change science; however, it remains uncertain what kind of impact the agile restlessness of the new media (and the brains they are reshaping) will have on an issue of this scale. Digitally coordinated civil disobedience certainly has a role to play in pressuring governments to enter into indispensable transnational accords: without such large-scale agreements, the damage in   u64258  icted by climate breakdown, from the Maldives to the Arctic, will be compounded.   
The critical question remains the question of strategy  how, in our transnational quest for stronger alliances, to combine activist staying power with new media agility. No technological revolution has an innate politics: witness how WikiLeaks catalyzed Climategate on the one hand   by leaking University of East Anglia emails on climate change that were gleefully seized on by right-wing denialists  and, on the other, leaked the cables that enabled Ivory Coast environmental justice activists and their allies to achieve a settlement for damages from the British commodities giant, Tra     gura, which for years had denied responsibility for dumping highly toxic oil slurry in land   lls around Abidjan. The slurry killed     fteen people in the short term and sickened ,. The activists   successful settlement in the Tra   gura case was a digital-era warning shot against those who assume that the environmentally-af u64258 icted poor are terminally invisible, disposable people.   
In volume and velocity, the new media have made available testimony on a previously unimaginable scale, testimony that can fortify the environmentalism of the poor and push back against the perpetrators of slow violence. When, for instance, the New York Times, along with American network and cable TV had largely baled on covering the Gulf oil disaster with any sustained, critical investigative edge, myriad new media sites kept skeptics and activists apprised. So, too, the underwater cabinet meeting staged in the Maldives was more than an isolated act of desperation by an imperiled micro-nation: the meeting achieved its global visibility not just randomly through YouTube but through the coordinated efforts of com, a vast, creative transnational coalition to reduce carbon emissions, a coalition that links activists  in the ether and on the ground  across scores of countries.   
Initiatives like com are helping narrow the gap between new media landscapes and landscapes of slow violence, the former disproportionately available to the af   u64258 uent, the latter disproportionately inhabited by the poor. Despite the digital divide, the exponential spread of cell phones has helped generate an activist connectivity even in regions without access to electricity. What we do not know  and warrants researching  is whether digital drift is more prevalent among the well-off than among the poor, whose online time is limited by cost and, moreover, whose communications may become more focally sustained when motivated by issues of ongoing, life-threatening urgency. If, for example, the answer to the Twitter slogan What  s happening right now?   is Government goons have arrived and are beating up villagers and starting to cut down our forest,   that now   may remain front and center for some time. This is exactly what happened when in  Peruvian indigenistas defeated a move by President Alan Garcia to pass legislation enabling corporations to undertake mining, oil, and timber extraction, without indigenous permission, in a,square mile tract of the Amazon. The scale of the protests, which brought together activists from  tribes as well as urban supporters, prompted the Peruvian congress to repeal the law, which had been slated as part of a neoliberal free trade   deal with the United States. The indigenistas creatively mixed labor-intensive and digital dissidence, blocking roads with logs, occupying oil and electricity plants, and creating mobile protest units whose actions were coordinated via cell phone.   
As protests from Myanmar to Iran have evidenced, digital networks are a force, but a force that cannot guarantee an outcome. They can be excellent for quickly disseminating damning or exhilarating evidence, but in the absence of political leadership and complementary, hierarchical forms of political organization, their socially transformative potential may run aground. That said, if we are unlikely in any straightforward manner to tweet our way toward environmental justice, our age of Flickring connectivity has irreversibly changed the way future writer-activists will bear witness and agitate for change.   
Addressing the vexed subject of literary commitment, Jean-Paul Sartre portrayed the writer as someone who has chosen a certain method of secondary action which we may call action by disclosure.   The revolution in the technologies of disclosure  from WikiLeaks to my neighbor  s blog   have altered the meaning of such secondary action unrecognizably. So, too, writer   has become a more demotic designation: less grand, less glamorous, less distinctively vocational, and more likely to involve mongrel blends of word, image, and video.   'c9criture engag 'e9e will never again be a specialist calling   'e0 la Sartre  or even   'e0 la Ken Saro-Wiwa  now that we have entered what one might call the age of the writer-hacktivist.   
Some writer-activists are     u64258 y-by-night operators, others are in for the long haul, as they strive to bring an attention-grabbing urgency to issues that might otherwise be marginalized by technological, neurobiological, and political forces of inattention. Whether our era of heightened connectivity and intensi   ed distraction compounds or alleviates destructive environmental short-term thinking will be shaped, in large measure, by the politics of the commons. Will the vast, insurgent digital energies directed at defending the information commons help mount an equally spirited defense of the commons in its oceanic, atmospheric, and terrestrial forms?   
The new media offer no panacea, but deployed with inventive vigilance, they constitute a potential resource of hope within a broad coalition to advance environmental justice. Such a coalition must necessarily draw on the strategic energies  and, in turn, empower  more traditional activist constituencies: labor, native, and student groups, progressive scientists, and campaigners for human rights, women  s rights, and civil liberties, as well as organized opponents of unchecked globalization. Within this coalition, that protean       gure, the writer-activist, will continue to play a critical role by drawing to the surface  and infusing with emotional force  submerged stories of injustice and resource rebellions. For although the technological landscape may be changing at an exponential rate, some things remain more durable. Among them, the conviction, in Nadine Gordimer  s words from a quarter century ago, that writers who believe in the transformation of society are always seeking ways of doing so that their societies could never imagine, let alone demand.     
Notes Acknowledgments Index   
}