I. A SLoW PhoToGRAPhIC ChEMISTRy of AN ExTENDED WAR Let us start with a hypothesis that opens up the discussion about the contemporary in this text: The contemporary con.dition expands to a multitude of times that overlap and that cannot be resolved into one, simple designation such as “new” or “old.” That is also the reason why I want to address the contemporary as a multitemporal reality where slowness entangles with the technological microtemporalities; time-critical media that are of time, but more importantly, manipulate the time-axis, which (in)forms our horizon of perception, ethics, affects, and more. hence the contemporary becomes detached from human-only time and to a time of other sort of tempor(e).alities as they pertain to the current moment. This sort of an asynchronous ontology of time has been already discussed in contexts of the postdigital as one particular way to understand media culture that does not proceed in one unified rhythm of experience or development. Geoff Cox has particularly clearly demonstrated that “[t]he complexity of historical temporality” is one that does not resolve itself to a historical periodization so much as to a cartography of the multiple levels, processes and conceptualisations of time that then produces also a map of issues: the contemporary as a “moment in which shared issues that hold a certain currency are negotiated and expanded.” We need to adjust to a complex sense of perception of time that constitutes the contemporary. I am interested in how the contemporary condition enables a focus on the tight link between environmental issues and technology, or more specifically: to address media technologies in the context of the Anthropocene and climate change. This shifts from the focus on technologies to the wider environmental and other rhythms that permeate our techno.logical culture. This essay is a short take on the technological contemporary, and how it is grounded in the slowness of earth’s dynamics, visual operations, geopolitics, and colonial arrangements. I am interested in how the contemporary planetary situation is a complex ecology of space, governance, and time. The contemporary becomes this sort of a fluid horizon where the relevancy of contemporary art continues to be about the complexification of the time and place of the assumed now as a long temporal and geographic stretch. one can think of the contemporary as a way to open up the complex entanglement of the temporal determinations of what consti.tutes the now as a stretch between multiple time horizons, which however have an implication on place too: that is why the essay at times focuses on locations, spatial formations, and movements of materials across the planet. Thus, the contem.porary has an angle towards time: it is a marker of temporality and this essay has a particular focus of addressing a cartog.raphy of that temporality as part of technology. It works through key terms such as slow violence that forms a particular rhythm of the contemporary that does not open to immediate experience, yet forms one background of that on a very bodily level too. This brings an alternative set of temporal concepts into play than discussing accelerationism or futurity — hence, . of course, accelerationism is not so and Armen Avanessian, eds., Accelerate: much about speed, despite some of the The Accelerationist Reader (falmouth/ connotations, but a more complex set Berlin: Urbanomic/Merve, ). I am, of arguments relating to the possibilities however, more interested in a set of concepts of reappropriation of technological that help us to understand the multiplicities possibilities, platforms and infrastructures of time at play in contemporary culture, for alternative ends. for discussion and not merely as a future-oriented perspective. different positions, see Robin Mackay I want to address the idea of temporal conglomerations and deep times of contemporary geopolitics as slowness or long term durations that unfold as not immediate for the human perception. I want to start by way of photographic art. fig. : A close up of her Taraf – No Man’s Land by Güven .I˙ncirliog˘.lu. Used with permission. As part of a selection of works from the rd and th Çanakkale Biennial in Turkey, Güven .I˙ncirliog˘lu’s installation . piece her Taraf – No Man’s Land from  is one of the many art and culture commentaries about the Gallipoli campaign, also known as Dardanelles Campaign, that took place on Turkish soil during the first World War. The events have been commemorated over the past times on many occasions and by many institutions from official governments to universities to cultural institutions. The war and its relation to modern Europe and global geopolitics has multiple narratives, and for historians of media and technology, it has been marked as a turning point of the twentieth century. The war was also a mobilization of new technologies including the wristwatch and different solutions for wireless communication on the front line; the media connections were important in military operations, but they also started to enter the private sphere of the domestic life. In addition, the chemical technologies presented a more efficient way of destruction from the air both as planes and as chemical warfare, which was employed on the European front effectively; such also formed the backbone of the pesticide-enhanced agriculture of the twentieth and twenty-first century. Many of the military operations and events took place on the outskirts of our current version of Europe, including Turkey and the ottoman Empire. A hundred years after the war, and a hundred years after the start of the naval assault by Britain and france, on  April , the digital photographs in the installation tell a partial historical story about what remains after the war and its devastation. The images do not, however, feature the usual iconography of human memory: of old photographs juxtaposed with other objects of memories; of faces as souvenirs of the old grainy image era transported in photography. It is a story not so much of faces but of landscapes of war and technology, of chemistry and destruction. The photographic installation is itself a sort of a mini-landscape that occupies one wall. The images commemorate the first World War as an event of technological warfare of massive ecological scales. But it also becomes clear that the commemoration works in alternative ways; it is less as a celebration of the ottoman victory than a subtle sort of a monument that entangles social history and natural history, and acts as a conglomeration of different temporal regimes. Even this distancing from the nationalist narrative is worthwhile noticing in the midst of the years of strong religiously tuned nationalist rhetoric and policy measures of current day Turkey. But the temporal politics of the images works differently. Enhanced by the atmosphere of silence surrounding the digital images placed on the walls of the Depo-gallery. piece is described as a commentary on the two times of “human life and the time of nature,” as the accompanying text on the wall informs. A usual historical narrative builds the memory around the  year milestone from the events, but the piece reminds of the multiple ways of narrating and recording time — not a passing of time, but a slow chemical sedimentation of time; it reminds how time is not merely a passing of events, but a milieu of multiple ways of accounting for it in the midst of human and non-human agents. It expresses a landscape of time, but not a landscape of the usual mastery through which we have been accustomed to think of nature in art history. It is a landscape, which we are still involved in. fig. : Installation view at Depo Gallery of her Taraf – No Man’s Land by Güven .I˙ncirliog˘lu. Used with permission.. The title No Man’s Land refers to the contested zone between the trenches that during the long months until January  changed occupation many times. It brings to mind the various historical narratives of human misery that the existential non-space of the trench meant — both in terms of anxiety of waiting, the deadly warfare and also the stink of diseased bodies. for material stories of the war, writers have addressed “bunker archaeology” as the architectural legacy of war that transforms into the concrete aesthetics of the Cold War that still lingers on in port and other towns bombed down during the latter of the two world wars, and replaced by Brutalist building blocks in many of their central quarters. But .I˙ncirliog˘lu. . Paul Virilio, Bunker Archaeology, trans. George Collins (New york: Princeton . Paul Virilio, Bunker Archaeology, trans. George Collins (New york: Princeton Architectural Press, ). extends from the social and human history of ruins to what lies beneath the architectural as its ground, the soil and the seabed. his photographic installation talks of the invisible chemical traces of dead bodies, body parts, barbed wired, gun shells, mines, dead trees, and flora — a natural history of the intensity of the war localized back then in Çanakkale but one that seems in its own way planetary. The geopolitical aim of landing through Çanakkale to reach Istanbul never succeeded according to the plans, but the geophysical legacy of such warfare in the age of advanced machinery left its concrete trace in the soil. .I˙ncirliog˘lu’s meditation is not, however, only . about that particular piece of land, the landing site and its territories formed of trenches, blue waters giving way to the war ships that connected to the supply routes, distant ports in England and other places, and many other operations; it also includes a global perspective. he continues by way of a short biospheric meditation of technical war: “Today, it is possible to say that the global state of war that also encompasses the biosphere has been going on for a century.” ˙.Incirliog˘.lu continues referring to the annihilation of masses in the Middle East, Africa, Asia — an extension of the continued war; on the other, the “total destruction of human habitats, rivers, forests and the biological-mineral world is being processed on by the neo-liberal policies worldwide. In this context, today’s Istanbul’s northern forests, quarries, African gold mines, vast territories of fracking in Canada and all other sites of destruction [....] resemble the scene of a ‘no man’s land’.” The story told was not after all a commemoration of a war that ended but the war that never ended; the war that facilitated an entry of new sorts of technical forms of control, . her Taraf, exhibition notes, . her Taraf. Çanakkale Biennial: Coordinates ˚. ..'"N-˚'"E, Depo Gallery, february – March . regulation, production of chemicals and more — an apt theme considering we are living in a sort of a continuous Cold War defined by territorial claims, energy wars, realpolitik of terrorism entangled with geopolitics, movements of biomass that expresses itself as the human suffering of forced refugee movements. Beginnings and endings become only temporary markers for narratives that are insufficient for the complexity of this time. The sort of a war we are addressing does not lend itself to easy stories of ideological oppositions but to complex networks, which entangle strategies and tactics with environmental realities and the finitude of the world of energy and materials. These sorts of wars are geopolitical in the fundamental sense, and do not involve just the two sides of troops in trenches. Indeed, it moves the focus from the human actors, soldiers, tragedies of personal, family and other scales to those of soil, the ground, the air — an elemental tragedy that is the backdrop in which a drama of the Anthropocene might unfold. It is also a tragedy that comes out clearest in its slowness. Rob Nixon’s study on “slow violence” is here an excellent reference point for a theoretical elaboration as to the environmental impact of colonialism, global corporate operations as well the modern warfare that cannot be statistically summarized in terms of the official casualties but needs a different sort of a narrative and temporal framework to reveal its longer term impact. Slow violence refers both to the realities of chemical and structural violence in different colonial and post-colonial conflicts and also the narrative ways in which to make this slow violence visible and accountable. Nixon refers to the necessity to apprehend this sort of slow reality, “whether on a cellular or a transnational scale” and . on the extended legacy of the . Rob Nixon, Slow Violence and . on the extended legacy of the Cold War, see John Beck and Ryan Bishop (eds.), ColdCold War, see John Beck and Ryan Bishop, the Environmentalism of the Poor War Legacies: Systems, Theory, Aesthetics (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University ). eds., Cold War Legacies: Systems, Theory, (Cambridge, MA: harvard University . Rob Nixon, Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor (Cambridge, MA: Aesthetics (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, ), . harvard University Press, ), .Press, ). to ask how to extend the cognitive and affective capacities of talking about what lies outside the first hand sensory, or even the time-span of human perception. how does one speak of a slowness, especially one that registers slowly as psychological and biological damage by way of accumulated chemicals, toxic soils, and mental disorders? how do we address this by way of visual culture that needs to attach to a multitemporal notion of time? he elaborates this by way of a reference to Mary Louise Pratt’s thoughts: Planetary consciousness (a notion that has undergone a host of theoretical formulations) becomes pertinent here, perhaps most usefully in the sense in which Mary Louise Pratt elaborates it, linking questions of power and perspective, keeping front and center the often latent, often invisible violence in the view. Who gets to see, and from where? When and how does such empowered seeing become normative? And what perspectives — not least those of the poor or women or the colonized — do hegemonic sight conventions of visuality obscure? Pratt’s formulation of planetary consciousness remains invaluable because it allows us to connect forms of apprehension to forms of imperial violence. What sort of politics is this? It picks up on a different set of temporal coordinates than many of the other discussions at the moment that emphasize acceleration and speed. It is more likely to speak to the set of concerns that Sarah Sharma has activated by way of reference to harold Innis. Sharma writes that “the temporal is political regardless of speed and is present no matter what the dominant technologies of the day are.” Sharma underlines how this is “not a new condition resulting . Nixon, Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor, . from speedup but an enduring political and economic reality with important cultural effects.” her suggestion of a power-chronography is then an attempt to make sense of the multiple speeds that define various techniques, actions, infrastructures, and not least, lived experiences of contemporary culture. There is also another level that complements lived tempo.ralities and is another sort of time, perhaps non-human. Provocatively, Thomas Pynchon once suggested, about the Second World War, that perhaps it was never ideological in the traditional sense: This War was never political at all, the politics was all theatre, all just to keep the people distracted [...] secretly, it was being dictated instead by the needs of technology [...]. The real crises were crises of allocation and priority, not among firms — it was only staged to look that way — but among the different Technologies, Plastics, Electronics, Aircraft, and their needs which are understood only by the ruling elite. Such a provocation leads also to discuss what do technologies, plastics, and more need — and how they link to the mobilization and exploitation of organic, including the environmental forces, including the worlds devoid of humans but full of life, chemical events, biospheric and atmospheric processes. This is a question of a political world of a different sort than in Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow as it takes its aim at the global geopolitical and corporate measures that impose a regime of distraction. Pynchon’s version comes closer to narratives in media studies too, but also needs to be complemented with a related focus on power-chronographies, time-axis manipulation and slow . Sarah Sharma, In the Meantime: . Thomas Pynchon, Gravity’s . Sarah Sharma, In the Meantime. Temporality and Cultural Politics (Durham: Duke Temporality and Cultural Politics (Durham: Rainbow, quoted in Geoffrey Winthrop.University Press, ), .Duke University Press, ), . young, “hunting a Whale of State: . Thomas Pynchon, Gravity’s Rainbow, quoted in Geoffrey Winthrop-young, hunting Kittler and his Terrorists,” Cultural Politics, a Whale of State: Kittler and his Terrorists,” Cultural Politics, vol. , iss.  (): .vol. , issue  (): . violence. We can call this a slow (media) technological violence of war: it is the soil, nature, the chemical residue that stayed as an archive of violence, and the chemical pollution that keeps on dispossessing certain human groups as much as various species and the biosphere in this extended warfare. It relates to the extended environmental impact of the link between contemporary multitempor(e)alities and the media technological materials as part of supply routes and the processes of fabrication involving rare earths and other earth materials that need to be refined for their usefulness as part of production of electronic objects. This slow media violence of geophysical proportions is the main milieu in which this text moves and builds its argument. II. MATERIALS of MEDIA Relating to the above contextualization of slow violence, one has to admit that war is a rather obvious starting point in media and art theory. The references to Pynchon as well as the history of the military and war are abundant in accounts such as friedrich Kittler’s media theoretical insight into history as well as for example Virilio’s take on technical visuality. In Kittler’s writings, it was most often bound together with an evaluation and even a clandestine appreciation of the role of the military-industrial complex. Indeed, if, for Martin heidegger, “technology is entrenched in our history” (in his lectures on Parmenides) we learned via Kittler that it is in the trenches in which technology becomes history. Media technologies embody a clandestine history of military investment, engineering and scientific contexts, which some have also expressed with the term “military.industrial-entertainment-academic complex.” Kittler’s writing argued for the existence of a secret story of mobilization of technology, knowledge, materials and energy that brought Kittler to a proximity with Pynchon’s narrative constructs. The huts of Bletchley Park, rocket sites at Peenemünde, abandoned radar stations, bunkers, are ruins of historical significance and reminders of the original sites where media technologies take place: computers, rockets, advanced mathematics employed as part of the war effort, giving us later the civilian uses of different audio and visual hardware, wireless communications and signal frequency hopping, and so forth. What trickles down, is visible and hearable as media . Besides Kittler’s various books and texts, see for example, Geoffrey Winthrop-young, . Besides Kittler’s various books Critical Inquiry, vol. , no.  (Summer “Drill and Distraction in the yellow Submarine: on the Dominance of War in friedrichand texts, see for example, Geoffrey ): –. Kittler’s Media Theory,” Critical Inquiry, Vol. , no.  (Summer ): –.Winthrop-young, “Drill and Distraction in . Ryan Bishop, “The Global . Ryan Bishop, “The Global University,” Theory, Culture & Society (): (–), the yellow Submarine: on the Dominance of University,” Theory, Culture & Society –.War in friedrich Kittler’s Media Theory,” ():  (–), –. culture and pop music. of course, there is more to this sort of an argument — as Geoffrey Winthrop-young demonstrates, the difficulty of addressing war and Kittler is that it was such an overdetermined combination that was used in so many alternative ways that Winthrop-young summarizes as motor, model, and motivation.  Without getting drawn into discussions of war, media and German media theory, one has to note that the shortcomings of Kittler’s claims have also been registered. As one minor contribution, I am interested in how Kittler’s thoughts on materiality can be expanded and made to discuss the wider context in which technical media operate. My proposal relates to some of the more environmental histories of media materiality and how they present an alternative, at times complementary and at times diverting, suggestion. But instead of thinking of “the environment” as a contained thing, I want to approach it through dynamics and temporalities. One such key concept for rethinking time and media comes from Siegfried Zielinski who introduced early on the idea of “palaeontology of media,” or “deep time of the media,” with however a focus different from mine. Zielinski’s focus is not related to the ecological turn I am interested in but offers the interesting set of concepts that bend time to become radically expanded to earth durations. The alternative focus and temporal schemes remind us that dynamic materiality, a secret life of other temporalities, does not have to start with war. It can commence from an appreciation of ecological multiplicities that seem to borrow more from the vocabulary of félix . friedrich Kittler, “Rock Music: . See, again, for example Winthrop-Misuse of Military Equipment,” in The Truth young, “Drill and Distraction in the yellow of the Technological World, trans. Erik Butler Submarine.” (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, . Siegfried Zielinski, Deep Time ). of the Media: Toward an Archaeology of . Geoffrey Winthrop-young, “De hearing and Seeing by Technical Means, Bellis Germanicis: Kittler, the Third Reich, trans. Gloria Custance (Cambridge, MA: and the German Wars,” Cultural Politics, MIT Press, ). vol. , issue  (November ): –. Guattari than Kittler, and which acknowledge the rich impact post-structuralist theory contributed to ecological thinking. Meditations on war have gradually turned to meditations concerning the more generalized hostilities to which we refer by the term “Anthropocene.” hence a proposition for a geological investigation of media culture is actually meant to work in this particular manner of expansion of interest and the realization of how media studies can be more than just media analysis or focus on the triangle of interests in “text, audience, industry.” It can inspire to expand and renew domains of knowledge (including academic methodology and theory); and also, more specifically, it can refresh what we mean by media materiality and by media time. It is an extension of the normal focus on social histories and times of the human media — whether of the McLuhan type characterization of media as extensions of man—or the more nuanced type of focus on the uses of media as tools. This other manner of extensions relates to the question of where we start a media studies analysis. Can we think of mediation as something more than just the thing contained in media devices? This does not necessarily have . félixélix Guattari, Three Ecologies, trans. Ian Pindar and Paul Sutton (London: Theto orient them to the situation and the Athlone Press, ). tasks at hand.” Wark quoted online fromtrans. Ian Pindar and Paul Sutton (London: . Verena Andermatt Conley, Ecopolitics. The Environment in Poststructuralist ThoughtThe Athlone Press, ). excerpt on flavorwire, http://flavorwire. (London: Routledge, ). com//flavorwire-exclusive.. Verena Andermatt Conley, Eco-. Terms are important and yet they have to be seen as ways to impact and entanglepolitics: The Environment in Poststructuralist civilization-is-doomed-mckenzie-wark-takes.with the real world, instead of a merely internal theory discussion. McKenzie WarkThought (London: Routledge, ). on-the-anthropocene. acknowledges. Tthiserms too,are waybyimportant listingofand yet terms. inventedJohn theoryinDurham thatPeters, ofare“Strangethe various creative consequence for the focus including Capitalocene, Manthropocene, Anthrobscene,they have to be seen as ways to impact sympathies: horizons of German and Chthulucene. “The Anthropocene introduces the labor point of view in the broadest possibleand entangle with the real world, instead American media theory,” in American sense into geology. Perhaps the challenge is then to find analogous but different ways to hackof a merely internal theory discussion. Studies as Media Studies, ed. Frank other specialized domains of knowledge, to orient them to the situation and the tasks at hand.”McKenzie Wark acknowledges this too, Kelleter and Daniel Stein (heidelberg: Wark quoted online from excerpt on flavorwire, http://flavorwire.com//flavorwire.by way of listing the various terms invented Universitätsverlag, ), –. exclusive-civilization-is-doomed-mckenzie-wark-takes-on-the-anthropocene.in theory that are of creative consequence . on mediation that precedes a . John Durham Peters, “Strange sympathies: horizons of German and Americanfor the focus — including Capitalocene, narrow definition of media devices, see media theory,” in American studies as media studies, ed. frank Kelleter and Daniel SteinManthropocene, Anthrobscene, Chthulucene. Sean Cubitt, Practice of Light: A Genealogy (heidelberg: Universitätsverlag, ), -. of Visual Practices from Prints to Pixels“The Anthropocene introduces the labor . on mediation that precedes a narrow definition of media devices, see Sean Cubitt,point of view — in the broadest possible (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, ), Practice of Light. A Genealogy of Visual Practices from Prints to Pixels (Cambridge, MA: MITsense—into geology. Perhaps the challenge –. See also Richard Grusin, “Radical Press, ), –. See also Richard Grusin, “Radical Mediation,” Critical Inquiry, vol. , no.is then to find analogous but different ways to Mediation,” Critical Inquiry, vol. , no.   (Autumn ): – (Autumn ): –.hack other specialized domains of knowledge, to be a New Age type of adoration of cosmic media realities but a realization that media is about manipulation of light, energy, materials, minerals, and more. In short, media is composed of the geophysical minerals and energies necessary to run high tech computational processes that constitute this other sort of a planetary level. What Jesuit priest Teilhard de Chardin branded as the “Noosphere” is actually a geopolitical circuiting of the planet via its underbelly, the infrastructure also necessary for the perception of the existence of the planet from its underground to its heavens, from its mines to its satellites in the sky. This conceptual shift is visible in many fields in media studies of the past years, as well as in the contemporary art world, which has embraced both a focus on the non-human and also a more specific focus on geophysics. I will return later to these ways the contemporary technological arts engage with the slow media violence in the Anthropocene. In writings and research about media, the rather simultaneous emergence of so many important studies about infrastructure is one such example of the raised awareness of the entanglement of media technologies and their environmental impact. It relates to the articulated connections between the most local and the planetary — of sites of infrastructure and realities of global signal traffic, as Lisa Parks and Nicole Starosielski have presented. Besides foregrounding “processes of distribution,” it also relates to opening up a new materialist perspective to this distribution: “the resources, technologies, labor, and relations that are required to shape, energize, and sustain the distribution of audiovisual signal traffic on global, national, and local scales.” Such are different structurations of time which . Nicole The Undersea Network (Durham: Duke University Press, ).. Nicole Starosielski, The Undersea “Introduction,” in Signal Traffic: CriticalLisa Parks, Cultures in orbit. Satellites and the Televisual (Durham: Duke University Press,Network (Durham: Duke University Press, Studies of Media Infrastructures, ed. Lisa).). Lisa Parks, Cultures in orbit: Parks and Nicole Starosielski (Urbana:. Lisa Parks and Nicole Starosielski, “Introduction,” in Signal Traffic. Critical StudiesSatellites and the Televisual (Durham: Chicago: University of Illinois Press, ), .of Media Infrastructures, eds. Parks and Starosielski (Urbana, Chicago: University of IllinoisDuke University Press, ). . Parks and Starosielski, SignalPress, ), .. Lisa Parks and Nicole Starosielski, Traffic, .. Ibid. are not merely human experienced. They also function on the level of signals that are microtemporal. however, what moves is not only the time-critical technological operations of signal traffic, but also the materials that make signal traffic possible; the material infrastructures themselves are also, managed across planetary supply chains. An awareness of the mineral constitution of media has gradually entered the vocabulary of media theory too as has a careful mapping of the multiple levels of materials and technocultural practices that contribute to a historically and thematically expanded understanding of the critical backbone of media culture. In terms of the mineral and metal realities, coltan is often discussed because of its importance as an ore that can be refined as tantalum, an essential part of technological culture of game consoles, mobile phones and more. The chemical proper.ties of the rare earths are however in some cases embedded in the dirty politics of the supply routes, having included use of child labor in mining as well as contextualized in the complex political contexts of the Democratic Republic of Congo. In other locations, such as in Baotou in China rare earth production also leaves not merely a proverbial trace, but a whole toxic landscape from the tailings: acids, heavy metals, carcinogens, and radioactive materials. But also other sorts of minerals, metals, and rare earths too are part of media technological culture, some of it very mundane, some of it less so: large amounts of tin, cobalt, palladium, silver, gold, and copper go to media technologies; copper was crucial for the establishment of the earlier, nineteenth and twentieth century global network society of telecommunications; lithium is one crucial alkalite . on microtemporalities that bypass the human cognitive and sensorial capacities,. See the forthcoming special section see Mark B.N. hansen, Feed Forward. On the Future of Twenty-First Century Mediathe human cognitive and sensorial capacities, on “Mediated Geologies,” edited by Jussi (Chicago: Chicago University Press, ). Wolfgang Ernst, Digital Memory and the Archivesee Mark B.N. hansen, feed forward: Parikka, Cultural Politics (Durham: Duke (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, ).On the Future of Twenty-First Century University Press, ). . See the forthcoming (November ) special section on “Mediated Geologies,”Media (Chicago: Chicago University Press, . This information relates to the edited by Jussi Parikka, Cultural Politics (Durham: Duke University Press).). Wolfgang Ernst, Digital Memory Unknown fields Division travel to the region, . This information relates to the Unknown fields Division travel to the region,and the Archive (Minneapolis: University documented in their “Rare Earthenware” documented in their Rare Earthenware-project to which we will return later.of Minnesota Press, ). project to which we will return later. metal that is in increasing demand because the role it plays in environmental battery technologies (and hence the “green smart futures”); considering basic elements of digital culture, a computer chip demands about sixty different minerals in its construction, a fact recognized in national security reports over the past ten years. one could easily claim that this is merely an extension of the hardware focus of some media theoretical accounts. The detailed view of what makes media media is itself however connected to a wider set of networks and political economic questions and scientific contexts which are the conditions of existence of what constitutes the contemporary as media cultural situation. It is the sort of effective administrative reality that these sorts of lists about minerals and materials constitute and express one node in various geopolitical strategies and tactical operations that then go to enabling the smooth functioning of supply lines. hence in this spatial distribution of materials the question of when becomes also important; when do materials transform into refined materials, embedded into devices, transported across, entering into homes, cars, and other situations of use as entertainment and when in their lifespan do they turn again into a bundle of unusable materials, scrap metals, and residual minerals? In addition to the recent awareness in media theory, it is also a cultural historical theme that characterizes the Cold War. The necessity in management of energy and non-fuel mineral resources was in many ways about the management of energy and mineral resources. In the s, especially from the US and allied perspective, this related to what was referred to as the “short- and long-term reliability and availability of foreign sources of oil and other energy and nonfuel mineral . National Research Council, . National Research Council, Minerals, Critical Minerals, and the U.S. Minerals, Critical Minerals, and the U.S. Economy (Washington: National Academies Economy, ix. See also Thomas Graedel et Press, ), chap . al., on the material basis of modern society,. National Research Council, Minerals, Critical Minerals, and the U.S. Economy PNAS Early Edition (): –.(Washington: National Academies Press, ), Chap . resources such as bauxite and cobalt.” The extended Cold War, and the various measures which tie the work of private corporations in mining, logistics, etc. with national and regional security interests is a complex bundle of actants, processes, and systems. In other words, the global nature of the nonfuel mineral market has mobilized a sense of criticality that ranges from availability of tantalum (from coltan for example) to the wider sense of infrastructural dependency that reveals this longer, deeper mineral constitution of media. While scholars such as Sean Cubitt have been especially important in talking of the need for a refined look at hardware — and the neo-colonial ecopolitics of resource extraction that systematically have a relation with lax regulation in indigenous lands — we can continue that line of thought to talk of the geophysics of media technologies as the true geos of geopolitics and the multiscalar reality of this material-temporal situation. The massive change from primary reliance on just few key materials only over  years ago (wood, brick, iron, copper, gold, silver, and then in the twentieth century plastics) has been replaced by a meticulous production, refinement, and standardization of minuscule elements, not least, minerals, that are crucial for the microchipped technological society. It was already recognized in Lewis Mumford’s account from the s that the new technological period will be one of new power sources, petroleum, transportability but also of rare metals and metallic 