In writing this book, I have returned repeatedly for inspiration to three towering ﬁgures. Edward Said, Rachel Carson, and Ramachandra Guha are a diverse and unlikely triumvirate, by training a professor of literature, a science writer, and a sociologist respectively. Yet all three exemplify an ideal of the public intellectual as someone unafraid to open up channels of inquiry at an angle to mainstream thought; unafraid moreover to face down the hostility that their unorthodoxy often prompted. In ranging from archive-driven scholarship to the public essay to op-ed polemics, Said, Carson, and Guha all have demonstrated a communicative passion responsive to diverse audiences, indeed a passion that has helped shape such audiences by refusing to adhere to conventional disciplinary or professional expectations. The beauty of the teaching life is this: the possibility of setting a life on course with nothing more complex than the right reverberation struck at the right time. Said had that kind of impact on me in the mid-s when I was a graduate student at Columbia. There I had found myself confronted with two unappetizing options: to follow either the fusty old formalists, with their patched-tweed Ivy League belle-lettrism, or the hipper new formalists, whose lemming run toward the palisades of deconstruction was then in full spate. To a young man, an unsettled greenhorn in America with a twinned passion for literature and world politics, Said offered a third way, encouraging me to reconcile those passions and ﬁnd a voice in which both could be articulated. I felt emboldened by Said’s determined search for a style—or rather, a whole repertoire of styles—equal to his wide-ranging commitments. He thrived on intellectual complexity while aspiring to clarity; he taught and wrote as if—and I know this should sound unremarkable for a literature professor—he yearned to be widely understood. His approach felt fervent, luminous when measured against the alternatives: close readings sealed against the world or deconstructionist seminars in which the stakes were as obscure as the language, as we poked at dead-ondelivery prose in the hopes of rousing enough life from it for our exertions to qualify as “play.” Said, by contrast, was alive to the high-stake worlds of persuasion and coercion, alive to political doublespeak and to the worldly costs of verbal camouﬂ age. As a reader, he believed in context—historical, political, and biographical context—all of which was material to him. Said’s vocal ﬂ exibility ampliﬁed his intellectual reach: across disciplines, continents, and all forms of the media. He scorned the cult of difﬁ culty, the notion that leaden writing signals weighty intelligence. He understood that it is far more difﬁcult to theorize with the cunning of lightness than it is to fob off some seething mess of day-old neologisms as an “intervention.” His devotion to style became integral to his political idealism and inseparable from his belief in an insurrectionary outwardness. As an environmentalist one must ask: what place for earthliness in Said’s worldliness? In,a month before his death, Said concluded an essay for Counterpunch with a yearning for a future informed by “alternative communities all across the world, informed by alternative information, and keenly aware of the environmental, human rights, and libertarian impulses that bind us together in this tiny planet.” Despite this late acknowledgment, one would be hard-pressed to call him, in any conventional sense, environmentally minded. However, it is quite possible, indeed probable, that as the energies of the transnational environmental justice movements I discuss in this book permeated the humanities more deeply, Said would have recognized their pertinence to his own work on bulldozed olive groves, land rights, and water politics, issues that come alive, most graphically, in After the Last Sky. If Said was dismissive of what he called “the petty ﬁefdoms within the world of intellectual production,” such impatience is equally evident in the writings of Rachel Carson, an even more maverick ﬁ gure. Carson believed that the mission of the public intellectual included exposing the euphemisms and bromides promulgated by cold-war America’s military-industrial complex. As she famously insisted, herbicides and insecticides should be unmasked as biocides: those supposedly precise weapons in the “war” on pests targeted nothing more precise than life itself. Almost two decades before neoliberalism implemented breakneck deregulations, Carson forewarned that, if left unchecked, capitalism’s appetite for the unregulated, specialist consumer product would leave behind a trail of nonspecialist fatalities. Carson redirected some of the national anxiety away from the Red Peril to the aerosol can of Doom perched on the kitchen shelf. By revealing how small, domestic choices can help secure a more inhabitable world, Silent Spring altered the landscape of fear and, crucially, fear’s time frame as well. The book, which appeared just weeks before the Cuban Missile Crisis, exhorted an America awash with paranoia to take charge of its fears by changing the way it lived in the short term to reduce long-term catastrophic risk. Carson’s extended view of risk’s time frame encouraged citizens to campaign for more stringent environmental legislation, in America and nations beyond. In so doing, Carson gave us pointers on how to hope and act across domains large and small. Like Said, Carson voiced a profound suspicion of the certiﬁ ed expert whom she saw as implicated in the economics of professional capitulation in ways that jeopardized society’s capacity to sustain uncompromised research. Carson had almost nothing to say directly about empire, class, and race, yet her work speaks powerfully to the environmentalism of the poor because she was passionately concerned with the complicity of the military-industrial complex in disguising toxicity, both physically and rhetorically. Her approach, moreover, helped hasten the shift from a conservationist ideology to the more socioenvironmental outlook that has proven so enabling for environmental justice movements. Above all, Carson was a renegade synthesizer: her gestures toward the big picture challenged institutionalized deﬁnitions of what constituted originality. In exposing the dubious funding of partitioned knowledge—and its baleful public health implications—she recast herself as an insurrectionary generalist. It is a measure of how tentative the rapprochement between postcolonial and environmental studies is that Said never mentions Carson in his work. (It is a measure too, one should add, of Said’s persistent, baleful indifference to any ascendant female voice.) Yet Carson in crucial ways anticipated Said’s skepticism toward compartmentalized expertise, toward the polluted funding structures of research, and toward obfuscatory language. She too mistrusted academic endeavor that, cushioned by corporate funding, feigned objectivity; she also mistrusted scholars interested in talking, undisturbed by inexpert audiences, always only to themselves. For Carson the culture—and cult—of the specialist was, as Said would later recognize, intellectually debilitating and ethically lamentable, entrammelled as it was in cold-war geopolitics. Ramachandra Guha is the third unclassiﬁable ﬁgure from whom I have drawn particular inspiration. A sociologist by training, an environmental historian by instinct, a journalist, opinion maker, and sports writer, Guha is a man who, in his own judgment, decided to be “methodologically promiscuous.” Like Carson, Guha chose the complex mix of freedoms and risks that arise from working outside the tenured security, obligations, and compromises that university positions entail. Equally discomﬁted by disciplinary and national chauvinisms, he has arguably done more than any intellectual to dispel the myth that environmentalism is “a full-stomach phenomenon” affordable only to the middle and upper classes of the world’s richest societies. He has drawn on—indeed, drawn out—neglected strands of American and European environmental thought while refusing them a global centrality. As far back as,he dismantled the well-intentioned but ultimately counterproductive project of deep ecology that, while posing as planetary, was at root profoundly parochial. Guha underscored the need to keep environmentalism connected to global questions of distributive justice, connected as well to the unequal burdens of consumption and militarization imposed on our ﬁnite planet by the world’s rich and poor, in their capacity as individuals and as nation-states. While unearthing tenacious traditions of environmental thought and activism among the poor, Guha has resisted sentimentalizing “traditional” cultures as peopled by “natural” ecologists. Guha has sought out collaborators who complement his expertise, notably the Indian ecologist and anthropologist Madhav Gadgil and the Catalan economist Joan Martinez-Alier. Together they have generated an indispensable vocabulary that informs this book (and many others across an array of disciplines). Terms like “the environmentalism of the poor,” “ecosystem people,” “omnivores” (those wealthy consumers who overstrain the planet), and “socioenvironmentalism” were all brought into circulation by Guha and his collaborators. Several of these terms have gone on to achieve traction in the broader worlds of the media and public policy. That success is testimony to Guha’s rhetorical adaptability as he strives to be innovative yet accessible, alert to the opportunities on offer across occasions, geographies, and genres. Extrainstitutional by instinct, disciplined yet never ploddingly disciplinary, Guha is an indispensable exemplar of what used to be called the free-ﬂ oating intellectual. Writing outside the mainstreams of both Marxism and s Western environmentalism, Guha had to weather, on the one hand, scorn from third-world radicals who dismissed environmentalism as reactionary, self-indulgent frippery and, on the other, from deep ecologists who charged him with being anti-ecological and anti-American. Yet over the long haul his writings have decisively reshaped many debates that animate the environmental humanities and social sciences. It is from these three diverse, unclassiﬁable intellectuals—a Palestinian literary scholar exiled in America, a marine biologist with roots in rural Pennsylvania, and a social scientist from Dehra Dun in the Himalayan foothills—that I have drawn particular inspiration, as much from their oppositional examples as from the tenor of their thought. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor Introduction I think of globalization like a light which shines brighter and brighter on a few people and the rest are in darkness, wiped out. They simply can’t be seen. Once you get used to not seeing something, then, slowly, it’s no longer possible to see it. —Arundhati Roy I think the economic logic behind dumping a load of toxic waste in the lowest-wage country is impeccable and we should face up to that.I’ve always thought that countries in Africa are vastly under polluted; their air quality is probably vastly inefﬁ ciently low compared to Los Angeles.Just between you and me, shouldn’t the World Bank be encouraging more migration of the dirty industries to the Least Developed Countries? —Lawrence Summers, conﬁdential World Bank memo, December, When Lawrence Summers, then president of the World Bank, advocated that the bank develop a scheme to export rich nation garbage, toxic waste, and heavily polluting industries to Africa, he did so in the calm voice of global managerial reasoning. Such a scheme, Summers elaborated, would help correct an inefﬁcient global imbalance in toxicity. Underlying his plan is an overlooked but crucial subsidiary beneﬁt that he outlined: ofﬂoading rich-nation toxins onto the world’s poorest continent would help ease the growing pressure from rich-nation environmentalists who were campaigning against garbage dumps and industrial efﬂ uent that they condemned as health threats and found aesthetically offensive. Summers thus rationalized his poison-redistribution ethic as offering a double gain: it would beneﬁt the United States and Europe economically, while helping appease the rising discontent of rich-nation environmentalists. Summers’ arguments assumed a direct link between aesthetically unsightly waste and Africa as an out-of-sight continent, a place remote from green activists’ terrain of concern. In Summers’ win-win scenario for the global North, the African recipients of his plan were triply discounted: discounted as political agents, discounted as long-term casualties of what I call in this book “slow violence,” and discounted as cultures possessing environmental practices and concerns of their own. I begin with Summers’ extraordinary proposal because it captures the strategic and representational challenges posed by slow violence as it impacts the environments—and the environmentalism—of the poor. Three primary concerns animate this book, chief among them my conviction that we urgently need to rethink—politically, imaginatively, and theoretically—what I call “slow violence.” By slow violence I mean a violence that occurs gradually and out of sight, a violence of delayed destruction that is dispersed across time and space, an attritional violence that is typically not viewed as violence at all. Violence is customarily conceived as an event or action that is immediate in time, explosive and spectacular in space, and as erupting into instant sensational visibility. We need, I believe, to engage a different kind of violence, a violence that is neither spectacular nor instantaneous, but rather incremental and accretive, its calamitous repercussions playing out across a range of temporal scales. In so doing, we also need to engage the representational, narrative, and strategic challenges posed by the relative invisibility of slow violence. Climate change, the thawing cryosphere, toxic drift, biomagniﬁcation, deforestation, the radioactive aftermaths of wars, acidifying oceans, and a host of other slowly unfolding environmental catastrophes present formidable representational obstacles that can hinder our efforts to mobilize and act decisively. The long dyings—the staggered and staggeringly discounted casualties, both human and ecological that result from war’s toxic aftermaths or climate change—are underrepresented in strategic planning as well as in human memory. Had Summers advocated invading Africa with weapons of mass destruction, his proposal would have fallen under conventional deﬁ nitions of violence and been perceived as a military or even an imperial invasion. Advocating invading countries with mass forms of slow-motion toxicity, however, requires rethinking our accepted assumptions of violence to include slow violence. Such a rethinking requires that we complicate conventional assumptions about violence as a highly visible act that is newsworthy because it is event focused, time bound, and body bound. We need to account for how the temporal dispersion of slow violence affects the way we perceive and respond to a variety of social afﬂictions—from domestic abuse to posttraumatic stress and, in particular, environmental calamities. A major challenge is representational: how to devise arresting stories, images, and symbols adequate to the pervasive but elusive violence of delayed effects. Crucially, slow violence is often not just attritional but also exponential, operating as a major threat multiplier; it can fuel long-term, proliferating conﬂicts in situations where the conditions for sustaining life become increasingly but gradually degraded. Politically and emotionally, different kinds of disaster possess unequal heft. Falling bodies, burning towers, exploding heads, avalanches, volcanoes, and tsunamis have a visceral, eye-catching and page-turning power that tales of slow violence, unfolding over years, decades, even centuries, cannot match. Stories of toxic buildup, massing greenhouse gases, and accelerated species loss due to ravaged habitats are all cataclysmic, but they are scientiﬁcally convoluted cataclysms in which casualties are postponed, often for generations. In an age when the media venerate the spectacular, when public policy is shaped primarily around perceived immediate need, a central question is strategic and representational: how can we convert into image and narrative the disasters that are slow moving and long in the making, disasters that are anonymous and that star nobody, disasters that are attritional and of indifferent interest to the sensation-driven technologies of our image-world? How can we turn the long emergencies of slow violence into stories dramatic enough to rouse public sentiment and warrant political intervention, these emergencies whose repercussions have given rise to some of the most critical challenges of our time? This book’s second, related focus concerns the environmentalism of the poor, for it is those people lacking resources who are the principal casualties of slow violence. Their unseen poverty is compounded by the invisibility of the slow violence that permeates so many of their lives. Our media bias toward spectacular violence exacerbates the vulnerability of ecosystems treated as disposable by turbo-capitalism while simultaneously exacerbating the vulnerability of those whom Kevin Bale, in another context, has called “disposable people.” It is against such conjoined ecological and human disposability that we have witnessed a resurgent environmentalism of the poor, particularly (though not exclusively) across the so-called global South. So a central issue that emerges is strategic: if the neoliberal era has intensiﬁed assaults on resources, it has also intensiﬁed resistance, whether through isolated site-speciﬁc struggles or through activism that has reached across national boundaries in an effort to build translocal alliances. “The poor” is a compendious category subject to almost inﬁnite local variation as well as to fracture along fault lines of ethnicity, gender, race, class, region, religion, and generation. Confronted with the militarization of both commerce and development, impoverished communities are often assailed by coercion and bribery that test their cohesive resilience. How much control will, say, a poor hardwood forest community have over the mix of subsistence and market strategies it deploys in attempts at adaptive survival? How will that community negotiate competing deﬁnitions of its own poverty and long-term wealth when the guns, the bulldozers, and the moneymen arrive? Such communities typically have to patch together threadbare improvised alliances against vastly superior military, corporate, and media forces. As such, impoverished resource rebels can seldom afford to be single-issue activists: their green commitments are seamed through with other economic and cultural causes as they experience environmental threat not as a planetary abstraction but as a set of inhabited risks, some imminent, others obscurely long term. The status of environmental activism among the poor in the global South has shifted signiﬁcantly in recent years. Where green or environmental discourses were once frequently regarded with skepticism as neocolonial, Western impositions inimical to the resource priorities of the poor in the global South, such attitudes have been tempered by the gathering visibility and credibility of environmental justice movements that have pushed back against an antihuman environmentalism that too often sought (under the banner of universalism) to impose green agendas dominated by rich nations and Western NGOs. Among those who inhabit the frontlines of the global resource wars, suspicions that environmentalism is another guise of what Andrew Ross calls “planetary management” have not, of course, been wholly allayed. But those suspicions have eased somewhat as the spectrum of what counts as environmentalism has broadened. Western activists are now more prone to recognize, engage, and learn from resource insurrections among the global poor that might previously have been discounted as not properly environmental. Indeed, I believe that the fate of environmentalism—and more decisively, the character of the biosphere itself—will be shaped signiﬁcantly in decades to come by the tension between what Ramachandra Guha and Joan Martinez-Alier have called “full-stomach” and “empty-belly” environmentalism. The challenge of visibility that links slow violence to the environmentalism of the poor connects directly to this book’s third circulating concern—the complex, often vexed ﬁgure of the environmental writer-activist. In the chapters that follow I address not just literary but more broadly rhetorical and visual challenges posed by slow violence; however, I place particular emphasis on combative writers who have deployed their imaginative agility and worldly ardor to help amplify the media-marginalized causes of the environmentally dispossessed. I have sought to stress those places where writers and social movements, often in complicated tandem, have strategized against attritional disasters that afﬂict embattled communities. The writers I engage are geographically wide ranging—from various parts of the African continent, from the Middle East, India, the Caribbean, the United States, and Britain—and work across a variety of forms. Figures like Wangari Maathai, Arundhati Roy, Indra Sinha, Ken Saro-Wiwa, Abdulrahman Munif, Njabulo Ndebele, Nadine Gordimer, Jamaica Kincaid, Rachel Carson, and June Jordan are alive to the inhabited impact of corrosive transnational forces, including petro-imperialism, the megadam industry, outsourced toxicity, neocolonial tourism, antihuman conservation practices, corporate and environmental deregulation, and the militarization of commerce, forces that disproportionately jeopardize the livelihoods, prospects, and memory banks of the global poor. Among the writers I consider, some have testiﬁed in relative isolation, some have helped instigate movements for environmental justice, and yet others, in aligning themselves with preexisting movements, have given imaginative deﬁnition to the issues at stake while enhancing the public visibility of the cause. Relations between movements and writers are often fraught and frictional, not least because such movements themselves are susceptible to fracture from both external and internal pressures. That said, the writers I consider are enraged by injustices they wish to see redressed, injustices they believe they can help expose, silences they can help dismantle through testimonial protest, rhetorical inventiveness, and counterhistories in the face of formidable odds. Most are restless, versatile writers ready to pit their energies against what Edward Said called “the normalized quiet of unseen power.” This normalized quiet is of particular pertinence to the hushed havoc and injurious invisibility that trail slow violence. Slow Violence In this book, I have sought to address our inattention to calamities that are slow and long lasting, calamities that patiently dispense their devastation while remaining outside our ﬂickering attention spans—and outside the purview of a spectacle-driven corporate media. The insidious workings of slow violence derive largely from the unequal attention given to spectacular and unspectacular time. In an age that venerates instant spectacle, slow violence is deﬁcient in the recognizable special effects that ﬁll movie theaters and boost ratings on TV. Chemical and radiological violence, for example, is driven inward, somatized into cellular dramas of mutation that—particularly in the bodies of the poor—remain largely unobserved, undiagnosed, and untreated. From a narrative perspective, such invisible, mutagenic theater is slow paced and open ended, eluding the tidy closure, the containment, imposed by the visual orthodoxies of victory and defeat. Let me ground this point by referring, in conjunction, to Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring and Frantz Fanon’s The Wretched of the Earth. In Silent Spring jolted a broad international public into an awareness of the protracted, cryptic, and indiscriminate casualties inﬂicted by dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT). Yet, just one year earlier, Fanon, in the opening pages of Wretched of the Earth, had comfortably invoked DDT as an afﬁrmative metaphor for anticolonial violence: he called for a DDT-ﬁlled spray gun to be wielded as a weapon against the “parasites” spread by the colonials’ Christian church. Fanon’s drama of decolonization is, of course, studded with the overt weaponry whereby subjugation is maintained (“by dint of a great array of bayonets and cannons”) or overthrown (“by the searing bullets and bloodstained knives”) after “a murderous and decisive struggle between the two protagonists.” Yet his temporal vision of violence—and of what Aimé Césaire called “the rendezvous of victory”—was uncomplicated by the concerns that an as-yet inchoate environmental justice movement (catalyzed in part by Silent Spring) would raise about lopsided risks that permeate the land long term, blurring the clean lines between defeat and victory, between colonial dispossession and ofﬁcial national self-determination. We can certainly read Fanon, in his concern with land as property and as fount of native dignity, retrospectively with an environmental eye. But our theories of violence today must be informed by a science unavailable to Fanon, a science that addresses environmentally embedded violence that is often difﬁ cult to source, oppose, and once set in motion, to reverse. Attritional catastrophes that overspill clear boundaries in time and space are marked above all by displacements—temporal, geographical, rhetorical, and technological displacements that simplify violence and underestimate, in advance and in retrospect, the human and environmental costs. Such displacements smooth the way for amnesia, as places are rendered irretrievable to those who once inhabited them, places that ordinarily pass unmourned in the corporate media. Places like the Marshall Islands, subjected between  and  to sixty-seven American atmospheric nuclear “tests,” the largest of them equal in force to,Hiroshima-sized bombs. In  the Atomic Energy Commission declared the Marshall Islands “by far the most contaminated place in the world,” a condition that would compromise independence in the long term, despite the islands’ formal ascent in  into the ranks of self-governing nations. The island republic was still in part governed by an irradiated past: well into the s its history of nuclear colonialism, long forgotten by the colonizers, was still delivering into the world “jellyﬁsh babies”—headless, eyeless, limbless human infants who would live for just a few hours. If, as Said notes, struggles over geography are never reducible to armed struggle but have a profound symbolic and narrative component as well, and if, as Michael Watts insists, we must attend to the “violent geographies of fast capitalism,” we need to supplement both these injunctions with a deeper understanding of the slow violence of delayed effects that structures so many of our most consequential forgettings. Violence, above all environmental violence, needs to be seen—and deeply considered—as a contest not only over space, or bodies, or labor, or resources, but also over time. We need to bear in mind Faulkner’s dictum that “the past is never dead. It’s not even past.” His words resonate with particular force across landscapes permeated by slow violence, landscapes of temporal overspill that elude rhetorical cleanup operations with their sanitary beginnings and endings. Kwame Anthony Appiah famously asked, “Is the ‘Post-’ in ‘Postcolonial’ the ‘Post-’ in ‘Postmodern’?” As environmentalists we might ask similarly searching questions of the “post” in postindustrial, post–Cold War, and postconﬂ ict. For if the past of slow violence is never past, so too the post is never fully post: industrial particulates and efﬂuents live on in the environmental elements we inhabit and in our very bodies, which epidemiologically and ecologically are never our simple contemporaries. Something similar applies to so-called postconﬂict societies whose leaders may annually commemorate, as marked on the calendar, the ofﬁcial cessation of hostilities, while ongoing intergenerational slow violence (inﬂicted by, say, unexploded landmines or carcinogens from an arms dump) may continue hostilities by other means. Ours is an age of onrushing turbo-capitalism, wherein the present feels more abbreviated than it used to—at least for the world’s privileged classes who live surrounded by technological time-savers that often compound the sensation of not having enough time. Consequently, one of the most pressing challenges of our age is how to adjust our rapidly eroding attention spans to the slow erosions of environmental justice. If, under neoliberalism, the gulf between enclaved rich and outcast poor has become ever more pronounced, ours is also an era of enclaved time wherein for many speed has become a self-justifying, propulsive ethic that renders “uneventful” violence (to those who live remote from its attritional lethality) a weak claimant on our time. The attosecond pace of our age, with its restless technologies of inﬁnite promise and inﬁnite disappointment, prompts us to keep ﬂicking and clicking distractedly in an insatiable—and often insensate—quest for quicker sensation. The oxymoronic notion of slow violence poses a number of challenges: scientiﬁc, legal, political, and representational. In the long arc between the emergence of slow violence and its delayed effects, both the causes and the memory of catastrophe readily fade from view as the casualties incurred typically pass untallied and unremembered. Such discounting in turn makes it far more difﬁcult to secure effective legal measures for prevention, restitution, and redress. Casualties from slow violence are, moreover, out of sync not only with our narrative and media expectations but also with the swift seasons of electoral change. Politicians routinely adopt a “last in, ﬁ rst out” stance toward environmental issues, admitting them when times are ﬂ ush, dumping them as soon as times get tight. Because preventative or remedial environmental legislation typically targets slow violence, it cannot deliver dependable electoral cycle results, even though those results may ultimately be life saving. Relative to bankable pocketbook actions—there’ll be a tax rebate check in the mail next August—environmental payouts seem to lurk on a distant horizon. Many politicians—and indeed many voters—routinely treat environmental action as critical yet not urgent. And so generation after generation of two- or four-year cycle politicians add to the pileup of deferrable actions deferred. With rare exceptions, in the domain of slow violence “yes, but not now, not yet” becomes the modus operandi. How can leaders be goaded to avert catastrophe when the political rewards of their actions will not accrue to them but will be reaped on someone else’s watch decades, even centuries, from now? How can environmental activists and storytellers work to counter the potent political, corporate, and even scientiﬁc forces invested in immediate self-interest, procrastination, and dissembling? We see such dissembling at work, for instance, in the afterword to Michael Crichton’s  environmental conspiracy novel, State of Fear, wherein he argued that we needed twenty more years of data gathering on climate change before any policy decisions could be ventured. Although the National Academy of Sciences had assured former president George W. Bush that humans were indeed causing the earth to warm, Bush shopped around for views that accorded with his own skepticism and found them in a private meeting with Crichton, whom he described as “an expert scientist.” To address the challenges of slow violence is to confront the dilemma Rachel Carson faced almost half a century ago as she sought to dramatize what she eloquently called “death by indirection.” Carson’s subjects were biomagniﬁcation and toxic drift, forms of oblique, slow-acting violence that, like climate change, pose formidable imaginative difﬁculties for writers and activists alike. In struggling to give shape to amorphous menace, both Carson and reviewers of Silent Spring resorted to a narrative vocabulary: one reviewer portrayed the book as exposing “the new, unplotted and mysterious dangers we insist upon creating all around us,” while Carson herself wrote of “a shadow that is no less ominous because it is formless and obscure.” To confront slow violence requires, then, that we plot and give ﬁgurative shape to formless threats whose fatal repercussions are dispersed across space and time. The representational challenges are acute, requiring creative ways of drawing public attention to catastrophic acts that are low in instant spectacle but high in long-term effects. To intervene representationally entails devising iconic symbols that embody amorphous calamities as well as narrative forms that infuse those symbols with dramatic urgency. Slow Violence and Structural Violence Seven years after Rachel Carson turned our attention to the lethal mechanisms of “death by indirection,” Johan Galtung, the inﬂ uential Norwegian mathematician and sociologist, coined the term “indirect or structural violence.” Galtung’s theory of structural violence is pertinent here because some of his concerns overlap with the concerns that animate this book, while others help throw into relief the rather different features I have sought to highlight by introducing the term “slow violence.” Structural violence, for Galtung, stands in opposition to the more familiar personal violence that dominates our conceptions of what counts as violence per se. Galtung was concerned, as I am, with widening the ﬁeld of what constitutes violence. He sought to foreground the vast structures that can give rise to acts of personal violence and constitute forms of violence in and of themselves. Such structural violence may range from the unequal morbidity that results from a commodiﬁed health care system, to racism itself. What I share with Galtung’s line of thought is a concern with social justice, hidden agency, and certain forms of violence that are imperceptible. In these terms, for example, we can recognize that the structural violence embodied by a neoliberal order of austerity measures, structural adjustment, rampant deregulation, corporate megamergers, and a widening gulf between rich and poor is a form of covert violence in its own right that is often a catalyst for more recognizably overt violence. For an expressly environmental example of structural violence, one might cite Wangari Maathai’s insistence that the systemic burdens of national debt to the IMF and World Bank borne by many so-called developing nations constitute a major impediment to environmental sustainability. So, too, feminist earth scientist Jill Schneiderman, one of our ﬁnest thinkers about environmental time, has written about the way in which environmental degradation may “masquerade as inevitable.” For all the continuing pertinence of the theory of structural violence and for all the modiﬁcations the theory has undergone, the notion bears the impress of its genesis during the high era of structuralist thinking that tended toward a static determinism. We see this, for example, in Galtung’s insistence that “structural violence is silent, it does not show—its is essentially static, it is the tranquil waters.” In contrast to the static connotations of structural violence, I have sought, through the notion of slow violence, to foreground questions of time, movement, and change, however gradual. The explicitly temporal emphasis of slow violence allows us to keep front and center the representational challenges and imaginative dilemmas posed not just by imperceptible violence but by imperceptible change whereby violence is decoupled from its original causes by the workings of time. Time becomes an actor in complicated ways, not least because the temporal templates of our spectacle-driven, / media life have shifted massively since Galtung ﬁrst advanced his theory of structural violence some forty years ago. To talk about slow violence, then, is to engage directly with our contemporary politics of speed. Simply put, structural violence is a theory that entails rethinking different notions of causation and agency with respect to violent effects. Slow violence, by contrast, might well include forms of structural violence, but has a wider descriptive range in calling attention, not simply to questions of agency, but to broader, more complex descriptive categories of violence enacted slowly over time. The shift in the relationship between human agency and time is most dramatically evident in our enhanced understanding of the accelerated changes occurring at two scalar extremes—in the life-sustaining circuits of planetary biophysics and in the wired brain’s neural circuitry. The idea of structural violence predated both sophisticated contemporary ice-core sampling methods and the emergence of cyber technology. My concept of slow violence thus seeks to respond both to recent, radical changes in our geological perception and our changing technological experiences of time. Let me address the geological aspect ﬁrst. In,Paul Crutzen, the Nobel Prize–winning atmospheric chemist, introduced the term “the Anthropocene Age” (which he dated to James Watt’s invention of the steam engine). Through the notion of “the Anthropocene Age,” Crutzen sought to theorize an unprecedented epochal effect: the massive impact by the human species, from the industrial era onward, on our planet’s life systems, an impact that, as his term suggests, is geomorphic, equal in force and in long-term implications to a major geological event. Crutzen’s attempt to capture the epochal scale of human activity’s impact on the planet was followed by Will Steffen’s elaboration, in conjunction with Crutzen and John McNeill, of what they dubbed the Great Acceleration, a second stage of the Anthropocene Age that they dated to the mid-twentieth century. Writing in,Steffen et al. noted how “nearly three-quarters of the anthropogenically driven rise in CO concentration has occurred since  (from about  to  ppm), and about half of the total rise ( ppm) has occurred in just the last  years.” The Australian environmental historian Libby Robin has put the case succinctly: “We have recently entered a new geological epoch, the Anthropocene. There is now considerable evidence that humanity has altered the biophysical systems of Earth, not just the carbon cyclebut also the nitrogen cycle and ultimately the atmosphere and climate of the whole globe.” What, then, are the consequences for our experience of time of this newfound recognition that we have inadvertently, through our unprecedented biophysical species power, inaugurated an Anthropocene Age and are now engaged in (and subject to) the hurtling changes of the Great Acceleration? Over the past two decades, this high-speed planetary modiﬁ cation has been accompanied (at least for those increasing billions who have access to the Internet) by rapid modiﬁ cations to the human cortex. It is difﬁ cult, but necessary, to consider simultaneously a geologically-paced plasticity, however relatively rapid, and the plasticity of brain circuits reprogrammed by a digital world that threatens to “info-whelm” us into a state of perpetual distraction. If an awareness of the Great Acceleration is (to put it mildly) unevenly distributed, the experience of accelerated connectivity (and the paradoxical disconnects that can accompany it) is increasingly widespread. In an age of degraded attention spans it becomes doubly difﬁcult yet increasingly urgent that we focus on the toll exacted, over time, by the slow violence of ecological degradation. We live, writes Cory Doctorow, in an era when the electronic screen has become an “ecosystem of interruption technologies.” Or as former Microsoft executive Linda Stone puts it, we now live in an age of “continuous partial attention.” Fast is faster than it used to be, and story units have become concomitantly shorter. In this cultural milieu of digitally speeded up time, and foreshortened narrative, the intergenerational aftermath becomes a harder sell. So to render slow violence visible entails, among other things, redeﬁning speed: we see such efforts in talk of accelerated species loss, rapid climate change, and in attempts to recast “glacial”—once a dead metaphor for “slow”—as a rousing, iconic image of unacceptably fast loss. Efforts to make forms of slow violence more urgently visible suffered a setback in the United States in the aftermath of /, which reinforced a spectacular, immediately sensational, and instantly hyper-visible image of what constitutes a violent threat. The ﬁery spectacle of the collapsing towers was burned into the national psyche as the deﬁnitive image of violence, setting back by years attempts to rally public sentiment against climate change, a threat that is incremental, exponential, and far less sensationally visible. Condoleezza Rice’s strategic fantasy of a mushroom cloud looming over America if the United States failed to invade Iraq gave further visual deﬁnition to cataclysmic violence as something explosive and instantaneous, a recognizably cinematic, immediately sensational, pyrotechnic event. The representational bias against slow violence has, furthermore, a critically dangerous impact on what counts as a casualty in the ﬁrst place. Casualties of slow violence—human and environmental—are the casualties most likely not to be seen, not to be counted. Casualties of slow violence become light-weight, disposable casualties, with dire consequences for the ways wars are remembered, which in turn has dire consequences for the projected casualties from future wars. We can observe this bias at work in the way wars, whose lethal repercussions spread across space and time, are tidily bookended in the historical record. Thus, for instance, a  New York Times editorial on Vietnam declared that “during our dozen years there, the Us. killed and helped kill at least. million people.” But that simple phrase “during our dozen years there” shrinks the toll, foreshortening the ongoing slow-motion slaughter: hundreds of thousands survived the ofﬁ cial war years, only to slowly lose their lives later to Agent Orange. In a  study, the environmental scientist Arnold Schecter recorded dioxin levels in the bloodstreams of Bien Hoa residents at  times the levels of Hanoi’s inhabitants, who lived far north of the spraying. The afﬂicted include thousands of children born decades after the war’s end. More than thirty years after the last spray run, Agent Orange continues to wreak havoc as, through bio-magniﬁcation, dioxins build up in the fatty tissues of pivotal foods such as duck and ﬁsh and pass from the natural world into the cooking pot and from there to ensuing human generations. An Institute of Medicine committee has by now linked seventeen medical conditions to Agent Orange; indeed, as recently as  it uncovered fresh evidence that exposure to the chemical increases the likelihood of developing Parkinson’s disease and ischemic heart disease. Under such circumstances, wherein long-term risks continue to emerge, to bookend a war’s casualties with the phrase “during our dozen years there” is misleading: that small, seemingly innocent phrase is a powerful reminder of how our rhetorical conventions for bracketing violence routinely ignore ongoing, belated casualties. Slow Violence and Strategies of Representation: Writer-Activism How do we bring home—and bring emotionally to life—threats that take time to wreak their havoc, threats that never materialize in one spectacular, explosive, cinematic scene? Apprehension is a critical word here, a crossover term that draws together the domains of perception, emotion, and action. To engage slow violence is to confront layered predicaments of apprehension: to apprehend—to arrest, or at least mitigate—often imperceptible threats requires rendering them apprehensible to the senses through the work of scientiﬁc and imaginative testimony. An inﬂ uential lineage of environmental thought gives primacy to immediate sensory apprehension, to sight above all, as foundational for any environmental ethics of place. George Perkins Marsh, the mid-nineteenth-century environmental pioneer, argued in Man and Nature that “the power most important to cultivate, and, at the same time, hardest to acquire, is that of seeing what is before him.” Aldo Leopold similarly insisted that “we can be ethical only toward what we can see.” But what happens when we are unsighted, when what extends before us—in the space and time that we most deeply inhabit—remains invisible? How, indeed, are we to act ethically toward human and biotic communities that lie beyond our sensory ken? What then, in the fullest sense of the phrase, is the place of seeing in the world that we now inhabit? What, moreover, is the place of the other senses? How do we both make slow violence visible yet also challenge the privileging of the visible? Such questions have profound consequences for the apprehension of slow violence, whether on a cellular or a transnational scale. Planetary consciousness (a notion that has undergone a host of theoretical formulations) becomes pertinent here, perhaps most usefully in the sense in which Mary Louise Pratt elaborates it, linking questions of power and perspective, keeping front and center the often latent, often invisible violence in the view. Who gets to see, and from where? When and how does such empowered seeing become normative? And what perspectives—not least those of the poor or women or the colonized—do hegemonic sight conventions of visuality obscure? Pratt’s formulation of planetary consciousness remains invaluable because it allows us to connect forms of apprehension to forms of imperial violence. Against this backdrop, I want to introduce the third central concern of this book. Alongside slow violence and the environmentalism of the poor, the chapters that follow are critically concerned with the political, imaginative, and strategic role of environmental writer-activists. Writer-activists can help us apprehend threats imaginatively that remain imperceptible to the senses, either because they are geographically remote, too vast or too minute in scale, or are played out across a time span that exceeds the instance of observation or even the physiological life of the human observer. In a world permeated by insidious, yet unseen or imperceptible violence, imaginative writing can help make the unapparent appear, making it accessible and tangible by humanizing drawn-out threats inaccessible to the immediate senses. Writing can challenge perceptual habits that downplay the damage slow violence inﬂicts and bring into imaginative focus apprehensions that elude sensory corroboration. The narrative imaginings of writer-activists may thus offer us a different kind of witnessing: of sights unseen. To allay states of apprehension—trepidations, forebodings, shadows cast by the invisible—entails facing the challenge, at once imaginative and scientiﬁc, of giving the unapparent a materiality upon which we can act. Yet poor communities, often disproportionately exposed to the force ﬁ elds of slow violence—be they military residues or imported e-waste or the rising tides of climate change—are the communities least likely to attract sustained scientiﬁc inquiry into causes, effects, and potential redress. Such poor communities are abandoned to sporadic science at best and usually no science at all; they are also disproportionately subjected to involuntary pharmaceutical experiments. Indeed, when such communities raise concerns, they often become targets of well-funded antiscience by forces that have a legal or commercial interest in manufacturing and disseminating doubt. Such embattled communities, beset by ofﬁcially unacknowledged hazards, must ﬁnd ways to broadcast their inhabited fears, their lived sense of a corroded environment, within the broader global struggles over apprehension. It is here that writers, ﬁlmmakers, and digital activists may play a mediating role in helping counter the layered invisibility that results from insidious threats, from temporal protractedness, and from the fact that the afﬂ icted are people whose quality of life—and often whose very existence—is of indifferent interest to the corporate media. To address violence discounted by dominant structures of apprehension is necessarily to engage the culturally variable issue of who counts as a witness. Contests over what counts as violence are intimately entangled with conﬂicts over who bears the social authority of witness, which entails much more than simply seeing or not seeing. The entangled politics of spectacle and witnessing have implications that stretch well beyond environmental slow violence. In domestic abuse, for instance, violence may be life threatening but slow, bloodless, and brutal in ways that are not always immediately fatal: a broken nose constitutes a different order of evidence from food or access to medical treatment or human company withheld over an extended period. A locked door can be a weapon. Doors for women are often longterm, nonlethal weapons that leave no telltale bloody trail; doors don’t bear witness to a single, decisive blow. In many cultures, moreover, rape isn’t deﬁ ned as rape if it is inﬂicted by a husband. And in some societies, a rape isn’t rape unless three adult men are present to witness it. As the journalistic chestnut has it, “if it bleeds, it leads.” And as a corollary, if it’s bloodless, slow-motion violence, the story is more likely to be buried, particularly if it’s relayed by people whose witnessing authority is culturally discounted. The Environmentalism of the Poor and Displacement in Place In the global resource wars, the environmentalism of the poor is frequently triggered when an ofﬁcial landscape is forcibly imposed on a vernacular one. A vernacular landscape is shaped by the affective, historically textured maps that communities have devised over generations, maps replete with names and routes, maps alive to signiﬁcant ecological and surface geological features. A vernacular landscape, although neither monolithic nor undisputed, is integral to the socioenvironmental dynamics of community rather than being wholly externalized—treated as out there, as a separate nonrenewable resource. By contrast, an ofﬁcial landscape—whether governmental, NGO, corporate, or some combination of those—is typically oblivious to such earlier maps; instead, it writes the land in a bureaucratic, externalizing, and extraction-driven manner that is often pitilessly instrumental. Lawrence Summers’ scheme to export rich-nation garbage and toxicity to Africa, for example, stands as a grandiose (though hardly exceptional) instance of a highly rationalized ofﬁcial landscape that, whether in terms of elite capture of resources or toxic disposal, has often been projected onto ecosystems inhabited by those whom Annu Jalais, in an Indian context, calls “dispensable citizens.” I would argue, then, that the exponential upsurge in indigenous resource rebellions across the globe during the high age of neoliberalism has resulted largely from a clash of temporal perspectives between the shorttermers who arrive (with their ofﬁcial landscape maps) to extract, despoil, and depart and the long-termers who must live inside the ecological aftermath and must therefore weigh wealth differently in time’s scales. In the pages that follow, I will highlight and explore resource rebellions against developer-dispossessors who descend from other time zones to impose on habitable environments unsustainable calculations about what constitutes the duration of human gain. Change is a cultural constant but the pace of change is not. Hence the temporal contests over how to sustain, regenerate, exhaust, or obliterate the landscape as resource become critical. More than material wealth is here at stake: imposed ofﬁcial landscapes typically discount spiritualized vernacular landscapes, severing webs of accumulated cultural meaning and treating the landscape as if it were uninhabited by the living, the unborn, and the animate deceased. The ensuing losses are consistent with John Berger’s lament over capitalism’s disdain for interdependencies by foreshortening our sense of time, thereby rendering the deceased immaterial: The living reduce the dead to those who have lived; yet the dead already include the living in their own great collective.Until the dehumanization of society by capitalism, all the living awaited the experience of the dead. It was their ultimate future. By themselves the living were incomplete. Thus living and dead were interdependent. Always. Only a uniquely modern form of egoism has broken this interdependence. With disastrous results for the living, who now think of the dead as the eliminated. Hence, one should add, our perspective on environmental asset stripping should include among assets stripped the mingled presence in the landscape of multiple generations, with all the hindsight and foresight that entails. Against this backdrop, I consider in this book what can be called the temporalities of place. Place is a temporal attainment that must be constantly renegotiated in the face of changes that arrive from without and within, some benign, others potentially ruinous. To engage the temporal displacements involved in slow violence against the poor thus requires that we rethink questions of physical displacement as well. In the chapters that follow, I track the socioenvironmental fallout from developmental agendas whose primary beneﬁciaries live elsewhere; as when, for example, oasis dwellers in the Persian Gulf get trucked off to unknown destinations so that American petroleum engineers and their sheik collaborators can develop their “ﬁnds.” Or when a megadam arises and (whether erected in the name of some dictatorial edict, the free market, structural adjustment, national development, or far-off urban or industrial need) displaces and disperses those who had developed through their vernacular landscapes their own adaptable, if always imperfect and vulnerable, relation to riverine possibility. Paradoxically, those forcibly removed by development include conservation refugees. Too often in the global South, conservation, driven by powerful transnational nature NGOs, combines an antidevelopmental rhetoric with the development of ﬁ nite resources for the touristic few, thereby depleting vital resources for long-term residents. (I explore this paradox more fully in Chapter : Stranger in the Eco-village: Race, Tourism, and Environmental Time.) In much of what follows, I address the resistance mounted by impoverished communities who have been involuntarily moved out of their knowledge; I address as well the powers—transnational, national, and local—behind such forced removals. My angle of vision is largely through writers who have afﬁliated themselves with social movements that seek to stave off one of two ruinous prospects: either the threatened community capitulates and is scattered (across refugee camps, placeless “relocation” sites, desperate favelas, and unwelcoming foreign lands), or the community refuses to move but, as its world is undermined, effectively becomes a community of refugees in place. What I wish to stress here, then, are not just those communities that are involuntarily (and often militarily) relocated to less hospitable environs, but also those affected by what I call displacement without moving. In other words, I want to propose a more radical notion of displacement, one that, instead of referring solely to the movement of people from their places of belonging, refers rather to the loss of the land and resources beneath them, a loss that leaves communities stranded in a place stripped of the very characteristics that made it inhabitable. For if environmental protest has frequently been incited by the threat of forced removal, it has also been incited by the threat of displacement without moving. Such a threat entails being simultaneously immobilized and moved out of one’s living knowledge as one’s place loses its life-sustaining features. What does it mean for people declared disposable by some “new” economy to ﬁnd themselves existing out of place in place as, against the odds, they seek to slow the ecological assaults on inhabitable possibility? What does it mean for subsistence communities to discover they are goners with nowhere to go, that their once-sustaining landscapes have been gutted of their capacity to sustain by an externalizing, instrumental logic? The desperate entrapments, the claustral options that result have galvanized environmental justice insurrections, in the global South and beyond. I would like to ground this point in Stephanie Black’s superb documentary Life and Debt. The ﬁlm can be interpreted as dramatizing the way neoliberal policies impose displacement without moving (or stationary displacement) on Jamaican communities, a process intimately connected to the long-term socioenvironmental damage inﬂicted on the island by slow violence. Life and Debt adapts to a Jamaican context Kincaid’s Antiguan polemic against tourism and against the neocolonial politics of unequal freedom of movement. This is a ﬁlm about arrivals, departures, and those unable either to arrive or depart. Yet the most consequential arrival is the hardest to depict: the advent of the “free market” in the form of IMF structural adjustment, rendered visible by planes disgorging federally subsidized American milk, onions, and potatoes at prices that destroy unsubsidized Jamaican farmers whose operations were small scale but intergenerational. To compensate for the resultant agricultural collapse and the rising debt that follows from importing more subsidized American food, Jamaica must increase its dependence on tourists who, disgorged from sleek jets, are then immured in dedicated pleasure zones. Black’s ﬁlm sets up an implicit link between the visiting tourists’ structured getaways and the structural adjustment visited upon the locals from which there is no getaway. We see guard dogs being trained to segregate mobile pleasure-seekers from trapped, angry locals forced to live their dislocated lives in place. Here, in capsule form, we witness one industry that has thrived under neoliberalism: the security industry, which has ﬂ ourished on the insecurities wrought by structural adjustment, by the “opening up” of markets, and by the erosion of long-term relations to the land through the annexation—and carting off—of the very conditions of life. Security has become one of neoliberalism’s signature growth industries, exempliﬁed by the international boom in gated communities, as walls have spread like kudzu, and the marketplace in barriers has literally soared, from Los Angeles to Sao Paolo; from Johannesburg to Jakarta; from Lagos, Lima, and Mexico City to Karachi. Ironically, as neoliberal policy makers have pushed to bring down barriers to “free trade,” those same policies have resulted in the erection of ever higher barriers segregating inordinate wealth from inordinate poverty. Neoliberalism’s proliferating walls concretize a short-term psychology of denial: the delusion that we can survive long term in a world whose resources are increasingly unshared. The wall, read in terms of neoliberalism and environmental slow violence, materializes temporal as well as spatial denial through a literal concretizing of out of sight out of mind. Neoliberal assaults on inhabited environments have of course met with variable success. Whether the target is an immobile resource such as forests, a mobile resource such as water, or a fugitive resource such as wildlife, the environment itself is not a predictably quiescent victim. Resistance may assume not just human forms but also arise from an unanticipated recalcitrance on the part of a targeted resource, which may prove harder to commodify and proﬁtably remove or manage than corporate moguls foresaw. We have witnessed as much, for example, in the largely unsuccessful attempts to privatize water: if  percent of the world’s largest cities now have privatized water systems, such efforts have sometimes experienced reversals—as in Bolivia, for instance—through a mixture of human resistance, topographical impediments, and obstacles to social engineering. That said, we need to be cautious about romanticizing the noncompliance that may inhere in a targeted resource: relative to the accelerated plunder involved, say, in the “second scramble” for Africa—as American, Australian, Chinese, European, and South African corporations cash in on resource-rich, regulation-poor, war-fractured societies—the resistance posed by nature itself should not be overstated. The recent turn within environmental studies toward celebrating the creative resilience of ecosystems can be readily hijacked by politicians, lobbyists, and corporations who oppose regulatory controls and strive to minimize pollution liability. Co-opting the “nature-and-time-will-heal” argument has become integral to attempts to privatize proﬁts while externalizing risk and cleanup, both of which can be delegated to “nature’s business.” This was dramatically illustrated by the Deepwater Horizon disaster— in the laxity that contributed to the blowout and in the aftermath. Big Oil and government agencies both invoked natural resilience as an advance strategy for minimizing oversight. Before the blowout, the Minerals Management Service of the Us. Interior Department had concluded that “spills in deep water are not likely to affect listed birds.Deepwater spills would either be transported away from coastal habitats or prevented, for the most part, from reaching coastal habitats by natural weathering processes.” Even after the disaster, this line of reasoning persisted. Oil industry apologist Rep. Don Young (R-AK), testifying at congressional hearings on the blowout, knew exactly how to mine this “natural agency” logic: the Deep-water Horizon spill was “not an environmental disaster,” he declared. “I will say that again and again because it is a natural phenomenon. Oil has seeped into this ocean for centuries, will continue to do it.We will lose some birds, we will lose some ﬁxed sea-life, but overall it will recover.” BP spokesman John Curry likewise explained how industrious microbes would cleanse the oil from the gulf: “Nature,” he concluded sanguinely, “has a way of helping the situation.” BP representatives repeatedly invoked the capacity of marine life to metabolize hydrocarbons and the dispersing powers of microbial degradation. But in conscripting nature as a volunteer clean up crew, BP and its Washington allies downplayed the way ravenous microbes, in consuming oxygen, thereby starved other organisms and exacerbated expanding oceanic dead zones. What will be the long-term cascade effect of the slow violence, the mass die-offs, of phyloplankton at the food chain base? It is far too early to tell. In short, the very environment that high-risk, deep-water drilling endangered was conscripted by industry through a kind of natural outsourcing. And so Big Oil’s invocation of nature’s healing powers needs to be recognized as part of a broader strategy of image management and liability limitation by greenwashing. Natural agency can indeed take unexpected, sometimes heartening forms, but we should be alert to the ways corporate colossi and governments can hijack that logic to grant themselves advance or retrospective absolution. Crucially, for my arguments about slow violence, the time frames of damage assessment and potential recovery are wildly out of sync. The deep-time thinking that celebrates natural healing is strategically disastrous if it provides political cover for reckless corporate short-termism. Writer-Activists and Representational Power The environmentalism of the poor is frequently catalyzed by resource imperialism inﬂicted on the global South to maintain the unsustainable consumer appetites of rich-country citizens and, increasingly, of the urban middle classes in the global South itself. The outsourcing of environmental crisis, whether through rapid or slow violence, has a particularly profound impact on the world’s ecosystem people—those hundreds of millions who depend for their livelihood on modest resource catchment areas at the opposite extreme from the planetary resource catchment areas plundered by the wealthy—the wealthy whom Gadgil and Guha have dubbed “resource omnivores.” The writer-activists I engage in this book share a desire to give human deﬁnition to such outsourced suffering, a desire to lay bare the dissociational dynamics whereby, for example, a rich-country conservation ethic is uncoupled from environmental devastation, externalized abroad, in which it is implicated. Correspondingly, we witness in these writers a desire to give life and dimension to the strategies—oppositional, afﬁrmative, and yes, often desperate and fractured—that emerge from those who bear the brunt of the planet’s ecological crises. The writer-activists I discuss in these pages who engage the environmentalism of the poor are a heterogeneous cast. Some, like Wangari Maathai and Ken Saro-Wiwa, helped launch environmental movements and assumed within them the role of porte-parole. They also became iconic ﬁgureheads and ultimately (in a phrase that expresses a contradictory tension) autobiographers of collective movements. Others, like Arundhati Roy and Indra Sinha, afﬁliated themselves with well-established struggles, helping amplify causes marginalized by the corporate media. Roy also served as a transnational go-between, connecting a speciﬁc struggle against the Sardar Sarovar Dam with international campaigns against megadams and, beyond that, with the antiglobalization movement itself. For Roy, Sinha, Maathai, and Saro-Wiwa, the extra visibility they afforded the environmentalism of the poor entailed, crucially, the development of rhetorical alliances that opened up connective avenues between environmental justice and other rights discourses: women’s rights, minority rights, tribal rights, property rights, the right to freedom of speech and assembly, and the right to enhanced economic self-sufﬁ ciency. Sometimes a writer-activist’s authority becomes, in their home country, a lightning rod for controversy in ways quite different from the controversies their writings stir abroad. Roy’s polemical essays in support of the movement opposing the Sardar Sarovar Dam on India’s Narmada River are a case in point: her testimony reached a vast international audience and enhanced the visibility of marginalized rural communities who mobilized against megadams, expressly in the Narmada Valley but more broadly across the global South. On the one hand, the New York Times refused to publish Roy (and other dissident public intellectuals, such as Edward Said and Noam Chomsky) presumably because her antiglobalization essays were ideologically unsettling. On the other hand, Indian opinion about her interventions split between those who lauded her for putting her celebrity in the service of the poor and those who lambasted her for behaving in a self-serving manner. An Anglophone Indian writer like Roy, whose national and international audiences are both substantial, faces particular challenges in trying to reconcile disjunctive audiences: rhetorical strategies, tonal inﬂ ections, and informational background that engage an international audience risk estranging a national one and vice versa. How different the situation is for a socioenvironmental writer like Derek Walcott from a small society that comprises an inﬁnitesimal fraction of his audience; even after he was awarded the Nobel Prize, Walcott’s books were nowhere to be found on sale in his natal St. Lucia. But what of writer-activists operating in circumstances where no viable movement existed to challenge the imperially buttressed forces of crony capitalism, where campaigns for environmental justice took shape before the term itself existed and where such campaigns assumed the forms of at best spasmodic protest? One such activist was Abdelrahman Munif who, by shuttling across a broad spread of ﬁctional and nonﬁctional forms, gave imaginative deﬁnition to the long view of the resource wars that have afﬂicted the Persian Gulf. His writings speak in defense of socioenvironmental memory itself—above all, the suppressed memory of the uprisings (which peaked in the s and s) against American petro-imperialism in partnership with an emergent petro-despotism. By the mid-s, when Munif’s Cities of Salt appeared, that dissident lineage protesting the petro-state’s union-busting, racist labor practices had been brutally quashed. Yet Munif was able to give imaginative and political deﬁnition to the memory of social protest while foreshadowing, with uncanny prescience, how the crushed campaigns for dignity and rights would become dangerously diverted into an anti-imperial religious fundamentalism. In turning to the Caribbean and South Africa, I revisit the question of the writer-activist’s role in fortifying embattled socioenvironmental memory. Jamaica Kincaid, June Jordan, Njabulo Ndebele, and Nadine Gordimer found themselves writing into the headwinds of an international nature industry propelled by a romanticized colonial history and by neocolonial fantasy. All four writers draw to the surface inconvenient questions about long-term ecologies of social injustice that cannot be colorfully blended into touristic boilerplate. In writing against a violent and violating invisibility they engage the contradictions that permeate the marketplace in idealized natural retreats—a marketplace premised on a retreat from socioenvironmental memory itself. At stake is the way suppressed histories of land theft, forced removal, slavery, and coercive labor achieve their most concentrated form in the ﬁgure of the spectral servant, whose obligatory self-effacement smoothes the tourist’s path toward immersion in an unsullied nature rich in pure moment, in serendipitous immediacy. The anticolonial energies that inform the essays I discuss by Kincaid, Ndebele, and Jordan are complicated by painfully riven reﬂections on representational authority. When you have ascended economically as a black woman or man into the middle classes, where do you stand in relation to those whose plight you depict and whose service, as a tourist, you depend on? Where do you belong in the historically sanitized, colonially hued international marketplace in environmental relaxation? In writing about tourism, poverty, and clashing cultures of nature, Kincaid, Ndebele, and Jordan all attempt to negotiate, through memoir and polemic, the mineﬁ elds of race, class, and gender that confront them on entering a realm of nature industry tourism clearly not designed for them yet to which they can afford class access. Many of the writers I consider in this book, as well as the three ﬁgures whom I acknowledge in my preface—Edward Said, Rachel Carson, and Ramachandra Guha—exemplify in their work the versatile possibilities of politically engaged nonﬁction. For one of the enduring passions that informs this book is the special allure that nonﬁction possesses for me as a writer, scholar, reader, and teacher. I am drawn to nonﬁ ction’s robust adaptability, imaginative and political, as well as to its information-carrying capacity and its aura of the real. Yet a tenacious tendency remains to marginalize nonﬁ ction, to treat it as at best supplementary to “real literature” like the novel or poetry rather than taking seriously its adaptive rhetorical capacities, the chameleon powers that make it such an indispensable resource for creative activism. Indeed, a particular joy of teaching transnational environmental literatures is the vigorous, varied writing on offer from within nonﬁction’s broad domain—memoirs, essays, public science writing, polemics, travel literature, graphic memoirs, manifestos, and investigative journalism. Some of the writers I consider in the chapters that follow work principally in nonﬁction forms, others in ﬁction, while most of them shuttle strategically and instinctively between the two. At a time when the memoir, in particular, has come under ﬁre for self-absorption, we would do well to remember that the “if-it’s-me-it-must-be-interesting” memoir is not the only type. The most effective memoirists, not least environmental ones, ﬁnd ways to draw on the form’s intimate energies while also offering the reader a social depth of ﬁ eld. Much has been written about the literary right to represent, some of it signiﬁcant work, some overly elaborate. Clearly power, including representational power, often works at an exaggerated remove. The writers I engage have ascended not just into the literate but into the publishing classes, thereby creating some inevitable distance from the bulk of the impoverished people about whom they write. Yet in the scheme of things, this hardly seems to me the most suspect kind of distance. Relative to the invisibility that threatens the marginalized poor and the environments they depend on, the bridgework such writer-activists undertake offers a mostly honorable counter to the distancing rhetoric of neoliberal “free market” resource development, a rhetoric that displaces onto future generations—above all through slow violence—the human and ecological costs of such “development.” The interplay between representational authority and displacement matters at a biographical level as well. Most of the writers I discuss— Maathai, Saro-Wiwa, Munif, Kincaid, Jordan, Ndebele, Naipaul, Carson, Richard Rodriguez, Nadine Gordimer, and James Baldwin—were the ﬁrst in their families to attend college. From the contradictions of sudden class displacement—often compounded by transgressed expectations that attend gender, race, sexuality, or immigrant status—a certain type of public intellectual may arise, someone who has to negotiate the vexing terrain of unfamiliar—and unfamilial—privilege fraught with an anxious sense of collective responsibility. The public role such ﬁgures assume is often animated both by an expressive anger and by the fear that their novel, precarious privilege is temporary or illusory—that one misstep may plunge them back into a viscerally remembered familial indigence. What frequently appears, then, is a quest to improvise community, both literal and imaginative, to help counter the isolation that comes from feeling economically, professionally, and psychologically unsheltered by precedent. These tendencies inﬂect the socioenvironmental and creative sensibilities that distinguish many of the writers in this book. Having extricated themselves improbably from impoverished circumstances—and then seeing their work published in the New Yorker, or on being awarded a Phd. or even the Nobel Prize—they stand above the immediate environmental struggles of the poor yet remain bonded through memory (and through their own vertiginous anxieties) to the straitened circumstances from which they or their families recently emerged. Hence, as go-betweens, such writers are at the very least intimate, highly motivated translators. The challenges of translating across chasms of class, race, gender, and nation is thus viscerally connected to memories of self-translation across dauntingly wide divides, as Tsitsi Dangarembga’s bildungsroman set in colonial Rhodesia, Nervous Conditions, illustrates so well. The thirteen-yearold rural heroine, Tambu, is granted the unexpected chance to acquire an education when her brother dies and a beneﬁcent uncle decides to divert the money he had committed to his nephew’s schooling to his niece instead. In approaching the mission school where she hopes to reinvent herself, the ﬁrst signal to Tambu of the distance she must travel ﬁnds expression through divergent cultures of nature: The smooth, stoneless drive ran between squat, robust conifers on one side and a blaze of canna lilies burning scarlet and amber on the other. Plants like that belonged to the cities. They had belonged to the pages of my language reader, to the yards of Ben and Betty’s uncle in town. Now, having seen it for myself because of my Babamukur’s kindness, I too could think of planting things for merrier reasons than the chore of keeping breath in the body. I wrote it down in my head: I would ask Maiguru for some bulbs and plant a bed of those gay lilies on the homestead in front of the house. Our home would answer well to being cheered up by such lovely ﬂowers. Bright and cheery, they had been planted for joy. What a strange idea that was. It was a liberation, the ﬁrst of many that followed from my transition to the mission. Tambu, on the brink of being educated toward middle-class possibility, experiences the garden as a portal into her imminent self-translation, as an ornate reminder of the gap she must leap. Emerging from her uncle’s car as (to use her word) a “peasant,” she cannot yet see this garden, exotically exempt from human need, as ordinary: it belongs to books, to the wealthy, to those at liberty to treat the earth as an aesthetic canvas. This indigent rural girl thus stands on the threshold of a divided self: she will be admitted to this garden aesthetic and learn to love it, but always with a double vision. She will belong forever to two earths: this second soil of luxurious self-expression but always just beneath it her childhood soil, fraught with survival’s urgent chores. A contortionist concern with representational authority can distract us from the fortitude required by those rare writers who, having escaped familial poverty, can convey an experientially rooted environmentalism that straddles immense divides. It is no coincidence that Jamaica Kincaid alights on Dangarembga’s garden descriptions to contrast them with those gardens, lush with assumed access, that she encounters in Henry James. One senses Kincaid looking on as an outsider at James’s easy familiarity with dominant upper-class European conventions of horticultural depiction. By creating an alliance with Dangarembga’s character, by choosing her as an imaginative coconspirator, Kincaid, the naturalized Caribbean American, denatures James’s gardens which, for all their literary ﬂoral familiarity, are just that: the kinds of gardens that prevail in a literature written predominantly by those remote from the soil perspectives of the laboring poor. This recognition scene between an Antiguan-American essayist and a ﬁctional Zimbabwean character speaks to the politics of the unforeseeable imaginative connection, to the far-off, serendipitous chance ﬁnd that becomes an exhortation. The scene speaks, more broadly, to the unpredictable dynamics of cross-cultural translation that attend the creative circuits of globalization from below, in literature and other cultural forms. We see this process at work in the way activists like Saro-Wiwa, Maathai, Chico Mendes, and Mahatma Gandhi have assumed an allegorical potency for geographically distant struggles. For example, on the tenth anniversary of Sarowiwa’s execution, anti-Shell activists in County Mayo, a region of Ireland’s historically impoverished west, unveiled a vast mural of Saro-Wiwa whom they had adopted posthumously as the iconic transnational ﬁgurehead of their local struggle against Shell. The mural displayed a Saro-Wiwa poem translated into Gaelic and the names of the Ogoni Eight executed alongside Saro-Wiwa—that in an Irish community enraged by the imprisonment of the so-called Rossport Five, activists who had nonviolently protested Shell’s plans to build a reﬁnery close to their homes. Spill-prone pipelines were to link the inland reﬁnery to offshore drilling sites, thereby jeopardizing the health and livelihood of a ﬁshing and farming community dependent, as in the Niger Delta, on fragile intertidal ecosystems. Anna Tsing observes similarly how in post-Suharto Indonesia, the Chico Mendes story became for grassroots activists a malleable, inspirational precedent reformulated for local need. So too the largely female tree-huggers who had energized India’s Chipko movement entered into Indonesian environmental parlance as a story of gendered resistance to forest stripping by globalizing corporate forces. Even before the Internet and cell phones became widespread, such circulating allegories were aided by traveling environmentalists and by writer-activists—like Vandana Shiva, whose eco-feminist reading of the Chipko movement inﬂ ected its [To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.] Figure  Mural of Ken Saro-Wiwa in County Mayo, Ireland, for a campaign by Irish activists against Shell. Some of his poetry (translated into Gaelic) is displayed, as well as the names of the eight other Ogoni activists executed on November, by Nigerian military personnel. Reproduced by permission of Wikimedia Commons. circulation among antiglobalization environmental movements, as well as among NGOs, thereby helping reshape the character of international funding and debate. Such precedents—whether through iconic ﬁgureheads or entire social movements—offer resources of hope in the unequal battle to apprehend, to stave off, or at least retard the slow violence inﬂicted by globalizing forces. Such precedents help us engage, in all their complexity, the politics of the visible and the invisible, as environmental justice movements—and the writer-activists aligned with them—strategize to shift the balance of visibility both in the urgent present and over the long haul, pushing back against the forces of temporal inattention that compound injustices of class, gender, race, and region. The Environmental Humanities and the Edge Effect Field biologists have devised the term “ecotone” to characterize the border zones between adjacent communities of vegetation where (as between, say, grasslands and wetlands) life forms that ordinarily require discrete conditions meet and interact. Ecotones may thereby open up new conﬁgurations of possibility (and for some species, introduce new threats) as the transitional areas create so-called edge effects. In university life, we are witnessing an upsurge in these edge effects as interpenetrating ﬁ elds proliferate at the borders between once separate disciplines, at times creating new dynamic combinations while also, depending on one’s perspective, inﬂicting casualties through habitat fragmentation. In the scholarly ecotone, as in the biological, one may detect an elevated concentration in the sheer variety of life-forms, but at the expense of less-adaptable, specialist species. How adaptable will the humanities prove in a less specialist environment? In particular, what kinds of connective corridors toward other disciplines can scholars creatively navigate in an intellectual milieu where habitat fracture is becoming increasingly pervasive? Certainly, the environmental humanities are entering a dynamic phase, as the long-established ﬁ eld of environmental history has in recent years encountered the ecocritical terrain of literary studies. We seem to be at a crucial turning point in the contribution literary scholars can make to the ecological humanities and, beyond that, to environmental studies at large. Critical choices now confront us as scholars and writers reaching out to other ﬁelds as we try to consolidate transformative possibilities emerging at the edges of the humanities, the social sciences, and the natural sciences. Inﬂ uential environmental literary critics, like Lawrence Buell, Wai Chee Dimock, and Ursula Heise have begun to forge innovative connections between literary environmentalism and the sciences around, for example, chaos theory and the premises underlying restoration ecology. What remains less developed, however, are the energizing interdisciplinary possibilities, the unrealized creative bridgework, between environmental literary studies and the social sciences. Such possibilities are overdue for recognition and, to that end, in the chapters that follow I have attempted to strengthen such links. In so doing, I have drawn on environmental scholarship by anthropologists, geographers, political scientists, and sociologists like Fernando Coronil, Al Gedicks, Ramachandra Guha, Adriana Petryna, Anna Tsing, and Michael Watts. I have drawn inspiration, too, from the writings of leading progressive public intellectuals of our age: John Berger, Mike Davis, Eduardo Galeano, Naomi Klein, George Monbiot, and Rebecca Solnit among them, all of whom have engaged, with ambitious communicative intent, transnational questions arising from the borderlands between empire, neoliberalism, environmentalism, and social justice. I have thereby sought, ﬁrst, to widen the interdisciplinary avenues available to us and, second, to keep alive a sense of the hugely varied public registers that writers can marshal to testify on issues of world urgency. When literary studies becomes uncoupled from worldly concerns, we frequently witness, alongside an excessive regard for ahistoric philosophy, an accompanying historically indifferent formalism that treats the study of aesthetics as the literary scholar’s deﬁnitive calling. Questions of social change and power become projected onto questions of form so that formal categories such as rupture, irony, and bricolage assume an inﬂ ated agency through what Anne McClintock has called “a fetishism of form:” The question is whether it is sufﬁcient to locate agency in the internal ﬁssures of discourse. [This] runs the risk of what can be called a fetishism of form: the projection of historical agency onto formal abstractions that are anthropomorphized and given a life of their own. Here abstractions become historical actors; discourse desires, dreams and does the work of colonialism while also ensuring its demise. In the process, social relations between humans appear to metamorphize into structural relations between forms—through a formalist fetishism that effectively elides the messier questions of historical change and social activism. These concerns have a direct bearing on the relationship between literary forms, forms of socioenvironmental change, and environmental activism. Crucially, how do we as environmental scholars keep questions of political agency and historical change central in order to connect specialist knowledge to broader public worlds in which environmental policy takes shape and within which resistance movements arise? In this book, I have underscored those places where writers, by drawing on literature’s testimonial and imaginative capacities, have engaged nonliterary forces for social change. Rather than displacing social agency onto anthropomorphized, idealized forms, I argue that any interest in form must be bound to questions of afﬁ liation, including afﬁliation between writers and movements for environmental justice. In addressing slow violence, the environmentalism of the poor, and the role of writer-activists, I have thus sought to integrate reﬂections on empire, foreign policy, and resistance with questions about aesthetic strategy. It is sometimes argued that ecocriticism’s singular contribution to environmental studies ought to be centered on the aesthetic—that an attentiveness to form is the environmental literary scholar’s proper bailiwick. But there is a risk in this if the aesthetic gets walled off as a specialist domain, severed from the broader sociopolitical environmental contexts that animate the forms in question. The more exacting challenge, it seems to me, is how to articulate these vital aesthetic concerns to socioenvironmental transformation. Clearly, genre study remains a pertinent component of our inquiries into the complex interface between aesthetic forms and forms of socioenvironmental change. As Wai Chee Dimock and Lawrence Buell have argued succinctly: “the importance of affect in environmental writing highlights the function of genre as a point of transit—a kind of switch mechanism—in the reversible hierarchy between the local and the global.” Indeed, some of the most powerful transnational environmental writing, from Sinha and Roy to Munif and Saro-Wiwa, has arisen at those transit points where genre inventively mediates foreign policy, nation-state violence, and local resource rebellions. Postcolonialism and Superpower Parochialism The most conceptually ambitious and inﬂuential ﬁgures within the ecocritical turn have been Buell and Heise, who deserve special credit for the reach and rigor of their innovative work, which has powerfully reshaped the priorities of literary studies and the environmental humanities more broadly. Buell and Heise are both Americanists by expertise and inclination. My background, and hence my approach, is somewhat different; my training is in postcolonial studies and, as such, the ‘elsewheres’ that fringe their work constitute my intellectual foreground. From a postcolonial perspective, the most startling feature of environmental literary studies has been its reluctance to engage the environmental repercussions of American foreign policy, particularly in relation to contemporary imperial practices. To be sure, this failing is not restricted to literary studies but has dogged the environmental humanities more broadly. Ramachandra Guha, while applauding the groundbreaking work by American environmental historians, has lamented their tardiness in exploring the transnational fallout of American environmental practices. Similarly, Robert Vitalis, the preeminent historian of Us.-Saudi petro-politics, has expressed regret that “the Us. historical profession has not as yet produced any signiﬁ cant tradition of scholarship in American interventionism that is comparable to the ‘new social histories’ of European imperialism.” Indeed, if as Greg Garrard noted in,“the relationship between globalisation and ecocriticism has barely been broached,” one should stress that the ecocritical silence around Us. foreign policy has been especially resounding. Why is it—as I explore in my ﬁnal chapter—that in American environmental literary studies, transcendental approaches have typically trumped transnational ones? There are signs that the environmental humanities are beginning to make some tentative headway toward incorporating the impact of Us. imperialism on the poor in the global South—Vitalis’s book America’s Kingdom: Mythmaking on the Saudi Oil Frontier () is an outstanding instance, as are powerful recent essays by Elizabeth DeLoughrey on the literatures associated with American nuclear colonialism in the Paciﬁc, Susie O’Brien on Native food security, colonialism, and environmental heritage along the Us-Mexican border, and Pablo Mukherjee’s groundbreaking materialist work on Indian environmental literatures. Yet despite such vitally important initiatives, the environmental humanities in the United States remain skewed toward nation-bound scholarship that is at best tangentially international and, even then, seldom engages the environmental fallout of Us. foreign policy head on. What’s at stake is not just disciplinary parochialism but, more broadly, what one might call superpower parochialism, that is, a combination of American insularity and America’s power as the preeminent empire of the neoliberal age to rupture the lives and ecosystems of non-Americans, especially the poor, who may live at a geographical remove but who remain intimately vulnerable to the force ﬁelds of Us. foreign policy. To be sure, the Us. empire has historically been a variable force, one that is not monolithic but subject to ever-changing internal fracture. The Us., moreover, has long been—and is increasingly—globalized itself with all the attendant insecurities and inequities that result. However, to argue that the United States is subject to globalization—through, for example, blowback from climate change—does not belie the disproportionate impact that Us. global ambitions and policies have exerted over socioenvironmental landscapes internationally. Ecocritics—and literary scholars more broadly—faced with the challenges of thinking through vast differences in spatial and temporal scale commonly frame their analyses in terms of interpenetrating global and local forces. In such analyses cosmopolitanism—as a mode of being linked to particular aesthetic strategies—does much of the bridgework between extremes of scale. What critics have subjected to far less scrutiny is the role of the national-imperial as a mediating force with vast repercussions, above all, for those billions whom Mike Davis calls “the global residuum.” Davis’s image is a suggestive one, summoning to mind the remaindered humans, the compacted leavings on whom neoliberalism’s inequities bear down most heavily. Yet those leavings, despite their aggregated dehumanization in the corporate media, remain animate and often resistant in unexpected ways; indeed, it is from such leavings that grassroots antiglobalization and the environmentalism of the poor have drawn nourishment. As American writers, scholars, and environmentalists, how can we attend more imaginatively to the outsourced conﬂicts inﬂamed by our unsustainable consumerism, by our military adventurism and unsurpassed arms industry, and by the global environmental fallout over the past three decades of American-led neoliberal economic policies? (The immense environmental toll of militarism is particularly burdensome: in,Us. military expenditure was. percent of the global total and exceeded by  percent the expenditure of the next fourteen highest-ranked countries com-bined.) How, moreover, can we engage the impact of our outsized consumerism and militarism on the life prospects of people who are elsewhere not just geographically but elsewhere in time, as slow violence seeps long term into ecologies—rural and urban—on which the global poor must depend for generations to come? How, in other words, can we rethink the standard formulation of neoliberalism as internalizing proﬁts and externalizing risks not just in spatial but in temporal terms as well, so that we recognize the full force with which the externalized risks are outsourced to the unborn? It is a pervasive condition of empires that they affect great swathes of the planet without the empire’s populace being aware of that impact—indeed, without being aware that many of the affected places even exist. How many Americans are aware of the continuing socioenvironmental fallout from Us. militarism and foreign policy decisions made three or four decades ago in, say, Angola or Laos? How many could even place those nation-states on a map? The imperial gap between foreign policy power and on-the-street awareness calls to mind George Lamming’s shock, on arriving in Britain in the early s, that most Londoners he met had never heard of his native Barbados and lumped together all Caribbean immigrants as “Jamaicans.” What I call superpower parochialism has been shaped by the myth of American exceptionalism and by a long-standing indifference—in the Us. educational system and national media—to the foreign, especially foreign history, even when it is deeply enmeshed with Us. interests. Thus, when considering the representational challenges posed by transnational slow violence, we need to ask what role American indifference to foreign history has played in camouﬂaging lasting environmental damage inﬂicted elsewhere. If all empires create acute disparities between global power and global knowledge, how has America’s perception of itself as a young, for-ward-thrusting nation that claims to ﬂ ourish by looking ahead rather than behind exacerbated the difﬁculty of socioenvironmental answerability for ongoing slow violence? Proﬁting from the asymmetrical relations between a domestically regulated environment and unregulated environments abroad is of course not unique to America. But since World War II, the United States has wielded an unequalled power to bend the global regulatory climate in its favor. As William Finnegan notes regarding the Washington Consensus, “while we make the world safe for multinational corporations, it is by no means clear that they intend to return the favor.” The unreturned favor weighs especially heavily on impoverished communities in the global South who must stake their claims to environmental justice in the face of the Bretton Woods institutions (the World Bank, the IMF), the World Trade Organization, and the G (now G) over which the United States has exercised disproportionate inﬂuence. That inﬂuence has been exercised, as well, through muscular conservation NGOs (the Nature Conservancy, the World Wildlife Fund, and Conservation International prominent among them) that have a long history of disregarding local human relations to the environment in order to implement American- and European-style conservation agendas. Clearly, the beneﬁciaries of such power asymmetries are not just American but transnational corporations, NGOs, and governments from across the North’s rich nations, often working hand-in-ﬁst with authoritarian regimes. Yet within these resource wars, image, idiom, and narrative are themselves powerful, if unpredictable, resources that regardless of origins can help advance the environmentalism of the poor. As I note in the chapters on Ken Saro-Wiwa and Wangari Maathai, the discourse of environmental justice, borrowed largely from the West (and often through personal exposure to America), is frequently blended with local discursive traditions and, in these melded forms, adaptively redeployed as a strategic resource. Such transnational meldings may prove unstable, but they have become signiﬁ cant forces in the unequal battles waged by the poor as they strive to be seen and heard on an international stage. These hybridized discourses can help afford socioenvironmental struggles an emblematic signiﬁ cance that strengthens their claim on rich-nation media that might otherwise dismiss them as obscurely local conﬂicts. International attention, in turn, can help afford such movements some protective visibility within their own nation-states (although a backlash of violence may also result). Among those whom Al Gedicks has dubbed global resource rebels, the hybridized, traveling discourse of environmental justice has proven critical in forging both South-South alliances and South-North alliances, not least among those who ﬁnd themselves pitted against analogous threats—be they giant hydroelectric dams, for example, or toxic tailings. Moreover, the development of strategic rhetorical common ground, however fragile, has proven critical in attempts to move beyond knee-jerk oppositions counterposing misanthropic rich eco-colonialists against third worlders assumed to be hostile to a narrowly deﬁned environmentalism. By laying claim to the mobile rhetoric of environmental justice, the dispossessed may enhance their prospects of becoming visible, audible agents of globalization from below. It is in the quest for such transnational visibility and audibility that writer-activists may play a critically enabling role. In cautioning against a narrowing of literary studies that pulls back from the wider world, we need to recognize the radical energies that traditions of postcolonial engagement at their best have encouraged. Debates over the merits and demerits of the term postcolonial are by now quite extended; no value is to be gained from rehearsing them. That said, postcolonial studies at its most incisive remains, it seems to me, an invaluable critical presence in an era of resurgent imperialism, an era in which—sometimes through outright, unregulated plunder, sometimes under camouﬂage of developmental agendas—a neoliberal order has widened, with ruinous environmental repercussions, the gulf between the expanding classes of the super-rich and our planet’s  billion ultrapoor. Indeed, the ofﬁcial and informal militarization of resource extraction as well as paramilitary conservation practices in the global South continue to spark or inﬂame broader conﬂicts. Such environmentally intensiﬁed conﬂicts become indissociable from the eroded prospects, under neoliberalism, of maintaining sustainable livelihoods, often under marginal conditions. Gargantuan transnational corporations like BP, ExxonMobil, Shell, Freeport McMoran, and Walmart have wised up to the kudos they can gain from greenwashing in the countries of the rich, through high-minded advertisement campaigns, through strategic donations to NGOs and universities, by buying out or intimidating scientists who might testify against the slow violence of their practices, and through rari.ﬁed talk about being ﬁ ne stewards of our delicate planet. Meanwhile, back on planet Earth, they persist with their proﬁtable devastation of relatively impoverished, less regulated societies—societies that have little visibility and recognition value in the rich-country corporate media. Such assaults on the livelihoods of the poor are given extra muscle by industry lobbyists who, while greenwashing with one hand, campaign with the other hand to further skew the terms of trade, weakening whatever frail environmental, labor, and human rights, and economic regulations stand between them and a “freer” market. In short, the oil majors and allied transnational corporations are potent, active players in manufacturing the icons and stories that shape popular perception of environmental science and policy. Against this backdrop, I am leery of the widespread assumption that everything postcolonial studies has enabled can always be assimilated, without loss, to the more ambitious, more contemporary-sounding global studies. The notion of the straight swap—midsized postcolonial for supersized global—is too often accompanied by a blunting of the adversarial edge, the oppositional incisiveness, that has distinguished postcolonial work at its most forceful. World literature studies has become a rich, dynamic ﬁ eld too diverse to characterize simply, but I do feel some concern about how the categorical turn, in literary studies, to world literature often ends up deﬂecting attention away from the anti-imperial concerns that a materialist postcolonial studies foregrounded. To be sure, we need scholarship and teaching that can address, in transnational terms, territories beyond postcolonialism’s conventional reach. But in so doing we should be watchful that surface geographical gains are not marred by political retreat, that neoliberal acts of violence, for example—especially slow violence—are not hastily euphemized as “global ﬂows.” In the classroom and beyond, we need to challenge globalization’s gung ho cheerleaders. Indeed, the most scintillating work by antiglobalization public intellectuals—Mike Davis, Naomi Klein, Amitava Kumar, Andrew Ross, and Arundhati Roy among them— carries forward postcolonialism’s critical energies while moving beyond the ﬁeld’s geographical and analytical limitations. Among the decisive challenges such critical initiatives face is that of scale: how can we imaginatively and strategically render visible vast force ﬁelds of interconnectedness against the attenuating effects of temporal and geographical distance? This is a crucial challenge if we are to generate any sustained understanding of the transnational, intergenerational fallout from slow violence. The task of thinking on such a geographical scale—let alone a temporal one—can seem overwhelming. Indeed, Wendell Berry has warned against the potentially debilitating effects of such large-scale approaches: “The adjective ‘planetary’ describes a problem in such a way that it cannot be solvedThe problems, if we describe them accurately, are all private and small.” I would argue, however, that although advocating personal environmental responsibility is essential, to shrink solutions to the level of the private and the small is evasive, even if it does constructively enhance one’s sense of agency. Planetary problems—and transnational, national, and regional ones—cannot simply be resolved by the aggregated actions of responsible individuals. Institutional actions (and institutionalized inaction) have a profound impact on environmental outcomes, most blatantly in relation to climate change, which no collectivized ethical behavior can combat without backing from well-implemented transnational accords. Slow Violence and the Production of Doubt The forces of inaction have deep pockets. Environmental activists face well-funded, well-organized interests that invest heavily in manufacturing and sustaining a culture of doubt around the science of slow violence, thereby postponing policies that would help rein in the long-term impacts of climate change in particular. A coalition of Big Oil, Big Coal, and Big Tobacco, led by ExxonMobil and Phillip Morris, has amassed an army of doubt-disseminators: lobbyists, political consultants, media plutocrats like Rupert Murdoch, right-wing think tanks, fake citizens’ groups on Facebook, scholarly reviewers of climate science written by non climate scientists, pseudo-scientiﬁc websites, university departments endowed to demonstrate conclusions friendly to Big Oil, Big Coal, and Big Tobacco and to sponsor uncertainty around climate change and, in the case of tobacco, uncertainty about the carcinogenic risks of second hand smoke. Despite the overwhelming, virtually unanimous, consensus among climate scientists that climate change is happening, is human-induced, is accelerating, and will have catastrophic consequences for human and much nonhuman life on earth, all the misnamed ‘denialists’ need do is keep ensuring that, in the public’s mind, the jury remains permanently out, so that irresolution rules. This is the point underscored by a leaked memo from political consultant, Frank Luntz distributed to Republican activists during George W. Bush’s presidency: “Should the public come to believe that the scientiﬁc issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly. Therefore, you need to continue to make the lack of scientiﬁ c certainty a primary issue in the debate.” Or, to cite another memo: “Doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the ‘body of fact’ that exists in the mind of the general public. It is also the means of establishing a controversy.” Controversy, in turn, plays into the media’s standard for-and-against formula for debate, even if that binary skews the consensus radically; even if, as in the case of anthropogenic climate change,  climate scientists conﬁrm that it is happening and none deny it. The against position thus typically devolves to a right-wing activist with no peer-reviewed climate change publications. In “Concerning Violence,” the opening chapter of The Wretched of the Earth, Fanon writes of the role played under capitalism by an army of cultural “bewilderers.” The spread of slow violence in our own times has been exacerbated by a lavishly funded army of new bewilderers, those doubt producers and doubt disseminators whose job it is to maintain populist levels of uncertainty sufﬁcient to guarantee inaction. We thus need to recognize that slow violence involves more than a perceptual problem created by the gap between destructive policies or practices and their deferred, invisible consequences. For in addition, slow violence provides prevaricative cover for the forces that have the most to proﬁt from inaction: under cover of deferred consequences, these energetic new bewilderers literally buy time. For the new bewilderers, led by Big Oil and Big Coal, doubt is more than a state of mind—it’s a bankable product. In this context, we should acknowledge the role played by a raft of public science writers who are writer-activists in their own way, ﬁgures like James Hoggan, Elizabeth Kolbert, Naomi Oreskes, Erik Conway, Andrew Rowell, Tim Flannery, David Michaels, and the incomparable George Monbiot who have followed the money and worked industriously to render visible the clandestine networks that ﬁnance doubt. Of Vampire Squids and Resource Rebels In,amidst the global economic crash, Matt Taibbi memorably depicted Goldman Sachs as a “great vampire squid wrapped around the face of humanity, relentlessly jamming its blood funnel into anything that smells like money.” Within a year his deepwater image of life-sucking avarice would seem an uncanny foreshadowing of petroleum giant BP. Indeed, Taibbi’s vampire squid achieved such popular resonance, I would suggest, because it gave emotional deﬁnition to an age, over and above the tentacular reach of any speciﬁc transnational corporation. An era of imperial overreach has brought to crisis a Washington Consensus ideology premised on globalizing the “free market” through militarization, privatization, deregulation, optional corporate self-policing, the undertaxation of the super wealthy, ever-more arcane ﬁnancial practices, and a widening divide separating the gated er-rich from the unhoused ultrapoor within and between nations. Together these practices have heightened capitalism’s innate tendency to abstract in order to extract, intensifying the distancing mechanisms that make the sources of environmental violence harder to track and multinational environmental answerability harder to impose. Such distancing mechanisms include the rhetorical gulf between development as a grand planetary dream premised on growth-driven consumption and its socioenvironmental fallout; the geographical distance between market forces as, to an almost occult degree, production has become disaggregated from consumption; and the temporal distance between short-lived actions and long-lived consequences, as gradual casualties are spread across a protracted aftermath, during which the memory and the body count of slow violence are diffused—and defused—by time. Yet memory loss is unevenly inhabited. Whether through sustained activism or more sporadic protests, resource rebels and the environmentally disenfranchised have mobilized repeatedly against memory loss, refusing to see their long-term livelihoods abstracted into oblivion, be it through state violence, transnational corporate rapacity, or some combination of the two. The resource rebels who rise up (or dig in for the long haul) express ambitions that may be difﬁcult to achieve but, in the scheme of things, are typically not grand: some shelter from the uncertainties of hunger; some basic honoring of established patterns of agroforestry, ﬁshing, hunting, planting, and harvesting; access to clean water; some prospects for their children; some respect for the cultural (and therefore environmental) presence of the guiding dead. And, if one accepts as a given that traditions are always mutable, resource rebels seek some active participation in the speed and character of cultural change. Failing all that, the rebels may seek compensation directed not at the nation at large (always an unequal abstraction) but at those most intimately affected by the defacement of the living land by the boardrooms of faceless proﬁ teers. The fraught issue of compensation connects directly with the infrastructural failures of the state: insurrectionary anger is repeatedly stoked when a community experiences technological modernization as extractive theft without service delivery. Under such circumstances, visible reminders of theft through modernity’s infrastructural invasions—by oil pipelines or massive hydroelectric dams or toxic tailings from mines—foment rage at life-threatening environmental degradation combined with the state’s failure to provide life-enabling public works. Often, as a community contends with attritional assaults on its ecological networks, it isn’t granted equitable access (or any access at all) to modernity’s basic infrastructural networks— piped clean water, a sewage system, an electric grid, a public transport grid, or schools—utilities that might open up alternatives to destitution. Such communities, ecologically dispossessed without being empowered via infrastructure, are ripe for revolt. Like those Niger Delta villages where children for decades had no access to electricity for studying at night, while above their communities Shell’s gas ﬂares created toxic nocturnal illumination. Too dark for education, too bright for sleep: modernity’s false dawn. Writers who align themselves with resource rebellions may help render decipherable the illegible distance between a far-off neoliberal ideology and its long-lasting local fallout. Such writers may serve as portes-paroles in an economic order premised on acute inequities in portability—of commodities, factories, jobs, people, and the environment itself. Writer-activists may thereby help expose injustices arising from the global freedom of movement afforded powerful corporations and the Bretton Woods institutions, while swathes of humanity are so ecologically undermined that they are abandoned to the plight of the stationary displaced. Whether as part-instigators or as ampliﬁers, writer-activists can strive to advance the causes of those who confront turbo-capitalism’s assaults on the resources that shape their survival. In confrontations between such typically unequal forces, determined hope is mixed with what John Berger, in the spirit of Antonio Gramsci, has called “undefeated despair.” While honoring the writer’s role, I wish to do so without glamorizing it. This role requires incessant compromise and incessant reinvention, particularly given the rapid changes in the technological and geopolitical climate in which writers must act. I should note here that the events I engage in this book are clustered in the period from the early s through the late-s— in what one might call neoliberalism’s near present. From the beginnings of the Reagan-Thatcher era through the Bhopal disaster, the collapse of communism and apartheid, the ﬁrst Gulf War, the rise of the Save the Narmada Movement in India, the International Campaign for Justice in Bhopal, Delta’s Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People in Nigeria, Kenya’s Green Belt Movement, to Acci Ecolgica in the Ecuadorian Amazon, the purview of Slow Violence predates two particularly signiﬁ cant environmental developments. First, the full-blown ascent of Chinese authoritarian capitalism, ushering in the Chimerican age as, through entangled rivalry, mutual dependence, and mutual mistrust, an emboldened China has joined an overstretched America as a global force in annexing—and carting off—the very conditions of life. We see this dramatically, for instance, in the -million-acre swathe of equatorial forest in the Democratic Republic of Congo that China has bought for a pittance to log and, once logged, has dedicated to monocultural palm oil production, thereby displacing and immiserating the forest’s inhabitants. This is all integral to the second scramble for Africa, as the continent’s resource maps are redrawn and its riches carved up among Chinese, American, European, Australian, and South African corporations typically working in cahoots with unelected ofﬁcials or regional brigands. Africa may contain some of the most acute cases of such rampant disregard for socioenvironmental survival in the Chimerican age, but it is far from alone. Alongside this geopolitical shift we are witnessing the most profound changes in centuries to the technological climate within which writer-activists must operate. In the era on which I focus, “text” was not yet a standard verb. Since then, proliferating nonprint platforms, an upsurge in new media networks, and digital immediacy have transformed the technological milieu within which oppression is inﬂicted and dissidence expressed—and within which speed is experienced. Among the writers I consider, Indra Sinha is by a long measure the most digitally attuned. His Bhopal novel, Animal’s People, straddles two eras, as he reconﬁgures a cold-war event for a twenty-ﬁrst century obsessed with virtual networks and biopolitics. Triggered by the  Union Carbide disaster and the environmental justice movement that rose from its ashes, Sinha’s  ﬁction can be read as an experiment in linking the protest novel to digitally networked dissent. Indeed, the public life of Animal’s People as a novel has been powerfully shaped by Sinha’s mobile, multimedia approach: on his blog and Web site, for example, he mixes non.ﬁctional testimony from Bhopal survivors with a sardonic visual-and-verbal fantasia of a poisoned city trying to rebrand itself as a tourist paradise. If the quarter-century lag between the Union Carbide explosion and Animal People’s appearance marks a shift from predigital to digital activism, the lag also allows Sinha to challenge the conventions of what constitutes a catastrophic event. For the explosion itself plays a relatively minor role in the novel; instead, Sinha focuses on the less obviously eventful aftermath, the slow violence that, by the novel’s end, comes to be recognized as the event itself, a violence that has yet to run its course. It is to this novel and Bhopal that I now turn.  Slow Violence, Neoliberalism, and the Environmental Picaresque It is only right, to my mind, that things so remarkable, which happen to have remained unheard and unseen until now, should be brought to the attention of many and not lie buried in the sepulcher of oblivion. —Anonymous, Lazarillo de Tormes A quarter century ago, Raymond Williams called for more novels that attend to “the close living substance” of the local while simultaneously tracing the “occluded relationships”—the vast transnational economic pressures, the labor and commodity dynamics—that invisibly shape the local. To hazard such novels poses imaginative challenges of a kind that writers content to create what Williams termed “enclosed ﬁ ctions” need never face, among them the challenge of rendering visible occluded, sprawling webs of interconnectedness. In our age of expanding and accelerating globalization, this particular imaginative difﬁculty has been cast primarily in spatial terms, as exempliﬁ ed by John Berger’s pronouncement, famously cited in Edward Soja’s Postmodern Geographies: “Prophecy now involves a geographical rather than a historical projection; it is space and not time that hides consequences from us. To prophesy today it is only necessary to know men [and women] as they are throughout the world in all their inequality.” Yet the legitimate urgency of spatial prophecy should not, in turn, distract us from the critical task—especially for environmental writers— of ﬁ nding imaginative forms that expose the temporal dissociations that permeate the age of neoliberal globalization. To this end, Animal’s People, Indra Sinha’s ﬁctional reworking of the Bhopal disaster, offers a powerful instance of a writer dramatizing the occluded relationships of transnational space together with time’s occlusions. Sinha’s novel stands (to adapt Williams’s phrase) as a work of “militant particularism,” yet it discloses through that radical particularity temporal and spatial webs of violence on a vast scale. Sinha’s approach to the aftermath of the catastrophic gas leak at Union Carbide’s Bhopal factory in December  throws into relief a political violence both intimate and distant, unfolding over time and space on a variety of scales, from the cellular to the transnational, the corporeal to the global corporate. Animal’s People can be read as a novel of risk relocation, not just in Susan Cutter’s spatial sense but across time as well, for the transnational off-loading of risk from a privileged community to an impoverished one changes the temporal topography of fear in the long term. The power of Animal’s People ﬂows largely from Sinha’s single-handed invention of the environmental picaresque. By creatively adapting picaresque conventions to our age, Sinha probes the underbelly of neoliberal globalization from the vantage point of an indigent social outcast. His novel gives focus to three of the deﬁning characteristics of the contemporary neoliberal order: ﬁrst, the widening chasm—within and between nations—that separates the megarich from the destitute; second, the attendant burden of unsustainable ecological degradation that impacts the health and livelihood of the poor most directly; and third, the way powerful transnational corporations exploit under cover of a free market ideology the lopsided universe of deregulation, whereby laws and loopholes are selectively applied in a marketplace a lot freer for some societies and classes than for others. A neoliberal ideology that erodes national sovereignty and turns answerability into a bewildering transnational maze makes it easier for global corporations like Union Carbide to sustain an evasive geopolitics of deferral in matters of environmental injury, remediation, and redress. Thus, among the many merits of Sinha’s novel is the way it gives imaginative deﬁnition to the occluded relationships that result both from slow violence and from the geographies of concealment in a neoliberal age. Slow Violence, Chernobyl, and Environmental Time Maintaining a media focus on slow violence poses acute challenges, not only because it is spectacle deﬁcient, but also because the fallout’s impact may range from the cellular to the transnational and (depending on the speciﬁc character of the chemical or radiological hazard) may stretch beyond the horizon of imaginable time. The contested science of damage further compounds the challenge, as varied scientiﬁ c methodologies may be mobilized to demonstrate or discount etiologies, creating rival regimes of truth, manipulable by political and economic interests. Moreover, the ofﬁ cial dimensions of the contaminated zone may shrink or dilate depending on which political forces and which research methodologies achieve the upper hand. What emerges, then, is a contest over the administration of difference between those who gain ofﬁcial recognition as sufferers and those dismissed as nonsufferers because their narratives of injury are deemed to fail the prevailing politico-scientiﬁc logic of causation; or for that matter, because they lack the political contacts to gain admission to the inner circle of certiﬁ ed sufferers and thus to potential compensation. These unstable, complex procedures—and hierarchies—of toxic recognition may create novel forms of biological citizenship, as in the long aftermaths of the  Bhopal disaster and the  Chernobyl explosion. The varieties of biological citizenship that emerged in the aftermaths of Bhopal and Chernobyl were distinct in certain ways, as were the media responses. Chernobyl received far more sustained attention in the Western media for several reasons. First, because of Chernobyl’s proximity to Western Europe, it was perceived as an ongoing transnational threat to “us” rather than a purely national threat that could be imaginatively contained as an Indian problem, over there among the faceless poor of the third world. Moreover, during the rise of Reagan’s and Thatcher’s neoliberal orders, Chernobyl could be directly assimilated to the violent threat that communism posed to the West, a threat that increased calls for heightened militarization and, ironically, for further corporate and environmental deregulation in the name of free-market forces. Bhopal, by contrast, was easier to dissociate from narratives of global violence dominated by a communist/anticommunist plotline, thus obscuring the free-market double standards that allowed Western companies to operate with violent, fatal impunity in the global South. Indeed, Warren Anderson (then Union Carbide’s chairman), company lawyers, and most of America’s corporate media argued in concert that blame for the disaster was local not transnational in character, ignoring the fact that in the run up to the disaster, the parent company had slashed safety procedures and supervisory staff in an effort to staunch hemorrhaging proﬁ ts. In reading Animal’s People as, among other things, an exposé of these neoliberal double standards, we can recognize Khaupfur as both speciﬁ c and nonspeciﬁc, a ﬁctional stand-in for Bhopal, but also a synecdoche for a web of poisoned communities spread out across the global South: “The book could have been set anywhere where the chemical industry has destroyed people’s lives,” Sinha observes. “I had considered calling the city Receio and setting it in Brazil. It could just as easily have been set in Central or South America, West Africa or the Philippines.” Chernobyl occurred three years before the Soviet Union’s dissolution in,which was also the year John Williamson coined the term “the Washington Consensus” to describe the prevailing ideology that united the World Bank, the IMF, and the Us. Treasury Department around the preconditions for “development aid” to nations in the global South. The developmentalist, neoliberal ideology of the Washington Consensus became a crucial foreign policy wing of what George Soros would term “market fundamentalism,” a broad crusade that would continue to gather force amid the postcommunist ideological uncertainty through demands for deregulation, privatization, and the hacking back of government social programs and safety nets. It was in this neoliberal context that, ultimately, the ailing survivors of both Bhopal and Chernobyl would ﬁnd themselves sinking or swimming. From a temporal perspective, the Chernobyl disaster of April, was distinguished by an initial catastrophic security lapse followed by a series of time lapses. The initial catastrophe was spectacular but, in media terms, deferred: eighteen days passed before Mikhail Gorbachev appeared on TV to acknowledge the explosion. Had the Soviet government dispensed nonradioactive iodine pills during that lost time, it could have averted the epidemic of thyroid cancers that only began, en masse, four years later at the time of the breakup of the Soviet Union and the emergence of a Ukraine that was ofﬁcially independent yet bound in environmental, epidemiological, and consequently economic terms to the Soviet-era nuclear disaster. The different timelines of mutation—international, intranational, intergenerational, bureaucratic, and somatic—are dizzying even to attempt to map. The prevailing winds carried the radiation plume north over Belarus, across eastern, western, and northern Europe, and beyond. Over time, through toxic drift, the national epicenter of the catastrophe would shift so that Belarus, not Ukraine, would become the country most pervasively polluted. In both countries, radiochemical poisoning coursed through air, water, soil, crops, meat, and mother’s milk at divergent speeds. Some symptoms manifested themselves relatively quickly, others appeared most dramatically among children born a decade or more after the disaster struck. The stratiﬁed slow violence of the fallout was compounded by the tardiness of the Soviet authorities, whose reﬂex response was foot-dragging, equivocation, and denial. Adriana Petryna’s anthropological work on post-Soviet Ukraine persuasively demonstrates the complex entanglements between environmental fallout and the socioeconomic fallout of being classiﬁed as a sufferer or nonsufferer. Compensation for Chernobyl injuries that rendered a citizen an ofﬁcial sufferer might be a mere $ per month. But after Washington Consensus-style market liberalization was imposed on Ukraine in,hyperinﬂation and mass unemployment followed, creating a sudden chasm between economic survivors and economic casualties. In this neoliberal context, ofﬁcial recognition as a Chernobyl sufferer-survivor—and the modest government compensation that ensued—could make the difference between subsistence and starvation for a whole family. The onus of proof fell on Ukrainians to develop, over time, an intimate expertise that was both bodily and bureaucratic. Which symptoms counted and which were discounted by the state? What work history in which ofﬁ cially recognized affected areas (and for how long) would strengthen one’s claim for the imprimatur of sufferer? Which doctors, lawyers, and bureaucrats could accelerate one’s efforts to enter that inner circle? How could one meet such inﬂuential people? Did they need to be bribed? The ground rules for being counted and discounted kept changing. Even the boundaries of the pollution zones were unstable, shrinking and dilating through a mixture of bureaucratic caprice, economic expediency, and slippery science. So the system required energetic, up-to-date pro-activism on the part of Ukraine’s biocitizens as they scrambled to avoid plummeting into economic free fall. A key survival strategy was to ﬁ t their life stories, their self-narrations, into the limited generic narratives of suffering that possessed a state mandate from which a small stream of compensation might ﬂow. New categories of identity emerged that—in other societies, in other times—might have remained conﬁned to the domain of private medical records. Instead, a Ukrainian might introduce herself, position herself publicly, by announcing, “I am a mother of a child who is a sufferer. I am an evacuee from Zone Two. My husband is a Chernobyl worker, Category One.” Foreign Burdens: Chernobyl, Bhopal, and Animal’s People Within ten days of the Chernobyl explosion, the Soviet authorities had mobilized thousands of Ukrainian coal miners to help with remediation work at the disaster site. One of them, Dmytro, who labored at the site for a month, was later afﬂ icted with pulmonary, cerebral, and cardiac disorders and found to have chromosomal aberrations. In an interview, he portrayed his body’s radiation load as a “foreign burden.” He was referring—as his interviewer notes—to the sense of harboring an alien, unnatural, and disquieting force within. But the miner’s choice of phrase deserves a second parsing, one directly pertinent to my reading of Animal’s People. Dmytro had been saddled, I would argue, with a “foreign burden” not just in a somatic but in a geotemporal sense as well: his post–Soviet Ukrainian body remained under occupation by a Soviet-era catastrophe. For in the case of Chernobyl, not only did the radiological toxicity travel across the national border, but (as the Soviet Union fragmented) the national border traveled across the toxicity. The Ukrainian body politic, though politically autonomous, remained environmentally and epidemiologically dominated by the “foreign burden” of a ghosted country, by a Soviet past that (as Faulkner would have it) was not even past. Through the workings of slow violence across environmental time, Ukraine’s sovereignty was compromised. If the Ukrainian body politic at large was afﬂicted with the burden of involuntary macro memory, mutagenic chromosomes at the micro level sustained a Soviet heritage that prompted Dmytro (and many compatriots) to refuse to reproduce for fear of a future burdened by an afﬂicted Ukrainian child. The concept of the foreign burden offers a productive prism through which to approach Sinha’s novelistic response to the Union Carbide disaster when, one early December night, a cloud of methyl isocyanate gas (in combination with other toxins) leaked from the company’s pesticide factory in Bhopal. Estimates of those killed immediately vary wildly, from,to,people. In the years that followed, scores of thousands of deaths and life-threatening disabilities were linked to exposure to the gas cloud. By some estimates,  residents continue to be afﬂicted. Although Animal’s People is set twenty years after the disaster, the novel dramatizes the illusion of the singular event: from a narrative perspective, the events—like the poisons themselves—are suspended in medias res, in a state of environmental, epidemiological, political, and legal irresolution. If the unfolding of slow violence across environmental time is typically managed through powerful strategies of distantiation, in Sinha’s novel those distancing strategies depend primarily, in geographical terms, on transnational corporate distance and, in temporal terms, on both the slow emergence of morbidity and on legal procrastination, which provide prevaricative cover for the CEOs who wish to exploit time to defuse the claims of the afﬂicted. Khaufpur (Sinha’s ﬁctional Bhopal) is the “world capital of fucked lungs”; it is also a place of interminable trials—bodily and legal. For twenty years the immiserated people of Khaufpur have been trying to bring the American CEOs of the corporation responsible—named simply as the “Kampani”—to stand trial in India. Thirteen judges have come and gone in successive trials, but the spectral Kampani bosses keep failing to materialize, maintaining their oceanic distance from a city inﬁltrated and haunted by Kampani poisons. Playing for time, the Kampani resorts to legal chicanery, political bribery, and backroom deals with India’s Minister for Poison Affairs and his colleagues. What emerges, then, is a contest between the tenacity of corporeal memory and the corrosive power, over time and space, of corporate amnesia emboldened by a neoliberal regime of deregulation. If Chernobyl’s “foreign burden” is an inheritance from an evaporated empire, we may read Khaufpur’s burden rather differently as the weight of absentee corporate colonialism, whereby transnational companies internalize proﬁts and externalize risks, particularly in impoverished regions of the global South. However, as a novelist, Sinha cannot afford to be this explicitly polemical. An observation by the Irish writer Eavan Boland is pertinent to the novelistic challenges Sinha must negotiate: “If the voice of a character in a ﬁction speaks too clearly with the anger and hindsight of an ethical view of history, then the voice may be made louder by argument but grow less convincing through being less imagined. Then both humanity and history can be sentimentalized.” Because novels about slow violence suffer from a drama deﬁcit, they risk resorting to sentimentality and political moralizing as substitutes for arresting spectacle and narrative tension. For these reasons some critics, like Anthony Lane, have gone so far as to assert that “eco-dramais a contradiction in terms.” Sinha astutely negotiates this ethical and dramatic mineﬁ eld without compromising his novel’s political energies. He does so by devising a narrator who is at best ambivalent toward the pursuit of justice, yet whose physical form serves as a bodily shorthand for Khaufpur’s transnational plight. Through a literal twist of fate—a toxic corkscrewing of his spine—Animal morphed at the age of six from an upright boy into a creature reduced to going around on all fours. When four-footed Animal (now nineteen) transports an ailing child on his back, his posture is precisely that of a beast of burden. Thus the symbolic economy of Animal’s body affords Sinha an implicit yet unforgettable image of a body politic literally bent double beneath the weight of the poisoned city’s foreign load. By making an occluded economic relationship physically manifest through his narrator’s body, Sinha thus ingeniously resolves the dilemma that Williams posed: how to give a novel a local materiality while exposing the web of transnational forces that permeate and shape the local. In the process, Sinha engages a temporal question that Williams did not speciﬁcally address: how do you dramatize the costs of uneven development when their delayed effects are intimate but their genesis is far-off in time? Animal’s People stages a simultaneous inquiry into the border zones between human and animal and the economic boundaries between rich and poor, the ever-deepening, dehumanizing chasm that divides those who can act with impunity and those who have no choice but to inhabit intimately, over the long term, the physical and environmental fallout of actions undertaken by distant, shadowy economic overlords. What does it mean, the novel asks, to belong to the same species—in biological, existential, ethical, and economic terms? [To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.] Orphaned when the Kampani explosion killed both his parents, Animal has little truck with the niceties of belonging. His familial isolation, physical difference, and moral disgust at human inhumanity combine to set him apart. Despite his singularity, however, Animal also serves as a symbolic condensation of the vast army of the economically orphaned, abandoned to their fate by the merciless logic of the neoliberal marketplace. Animal is a foundling who has morphed into a posthuman changeling, a one-of-a-kind creature spawned by a kind of chemical autochthony. Marooned in the present, Animal views himself as a four-footed species without precedent or the prospect of progeny, the alpha and omega of his kind. We can read him as a new beginning, which (in keeping with the novel’s apocalyptic tenor) doubles as the end of time. Animal has forgotten his childhood human name: it’s as remote, as inaccessible as his city’s culturally rich, prelapsarian, pretoxic past. From the moment children at the orphanage taunt him for walking like an animal, he embraces the name of his alienation and abasement, scofﬁng at those, like Zafar (the slum’s chief anti-Kampani activist), who suggest that he is not a beast just an “especially abled” human. The catastrophe that has befallen Khaufpur, imposing on the city a radically changed culture of nature, has in the process converted Animal into a ﬁ gure who insists, “I’ve no choice but to be unnatural.” His refusal of the natural is redolent of the stance adopted by Chernobyl’s self-declared “biorobots” who, through hazardous exposure, inhabited a related gray zone between the human and the posthuman. Four months after the initial Chernobyl explosion, the Soviet authorities sent in robots to remove radioactive debris; when off-the-charts radiation levels rendered the robots dysfunctional, young men were conscripted to replace them. The men recognized they were being treated not as human employees but as “biological resources to be used and thrown out.[S]lated for bio-robotic death.” As the Ukrainian director of the Ministry of Health declared, “no one has ever deﬁned the value of a human here.” In this context, it is understandable that the young men would insist on their indeterminate status, not as human citizens, but as biorobots destined for the scrap heap of expendable parts. Like Animal, whose humanity was subject to a hostile foreign takeover, the biorobots exempliﬁed the dissolution of the boundaries of their humanity through the slow, corrosive violence of environmental catastrophe. The Environmental Picaresque, Abjection, and the Urban Poor Animal joins a long line of picaros: canny, scheming social outliers governed by unruly appetites, potty-mouthed and scatalogically obsessed, often orphaned outcasts who, drawn from polite society’s vast impoverished margins, survive by parasitism and by their wits. The picaro is the abject from which the body and the body politic cannot part. Stigmatized as aberrant and ﬁlthy, the picaro embodies everything the socially remote privileged classes, with their ornate rhetoric and social etiquette, seek to contain, repress, and eject. But the picaro keeps resurfacing as a discomﬁ ting reminder of the limits to the social barriers and the studied amnesia that elite society strives to uphold. Julia Kristeva’s formulation of the abject thus offers a productive analytic frame for Animal’s People, a picaresque novel about the dissociative rituals of a neoliberal transnationalism determined to disown, across time and space, the toxic repercussions innate to its practices, repercussions that will return to haunt it. Sinha’s poisoned picaro embodies—at a somatic and a transnational level—the conditions under which, in Kristeva’s terms, “the subject ﬁnds the impossible within.” The unsettling confrontation with the abject entails facing “those fragile states where man strays on the territories of animal.” This confrontation with stray territory results in repeated efforts to cast out the threatening traces of animalism from the culture. If we associate abjection with the rupturing of systemic order and sealed identity from within, then Sinha has created in his picaresque Animal a potent compression of disturbing, porous ambiguity, a ﬁgure whose leakiness confounds the borders between the human and the nonhuman as well as the borders between the national and the foreign. His presence exposes the limits of disownership: he is an irrepressible, abject reminder of that from which the Kampani— however far off it may seem—can never fully part. Since the Spanish Golden Age, the picaresque has posed questions about the class and gender politics of crime, contrasting the narrator’s peccadilloes with the weightier crimes that society’s overlords commit and from which they are structurally exonerated. This passion for interrogating the hypocrisies of criminality—above all, the inequitable deﬁnitions of crime—makes the picaresque a promising ﬁt with the priorities of the environmental justice movement. Sinha, in repurposing the picaresque, brings into brilliant focus the environmental, epidemiological, and economic fallout of the terrors that transnational neoliberal lawlessness dispenses in cahoots with corrupt, legally immune local politicians. The picaresque emerged between  and  in the Spanish Golden Age as a countergenre, a reminder that, for all the infusion into Spain of transatlantic imperial wealth, the great majority of Spaniards remained deeply poor. The genre—most famously in Lazarillo de Tormes—was countergeneric in tone as well, rich in bawdy street argot that clattered, in subversive counterpoint, against Spanish as imperial language and against the attendant ascendancy of classical literary forms. The picaresque thus inserted itself into a historical moment when a chasm was opening between the exalted, gluttonous classes with their linguistic reﬁnements and perfumed pretensions and the indigent masses for whom life was an hourly scramble for survival. As in our own age of ballooning CEO golden parachutes soaring above a planet of the slums, the picaro achieves a particular potency as a marginal literary ﬁgure, a seldom-heard voice, who belongs nonetheless to the statistical majority. His or her existence depends on quick-witted improvisation coupled to expedient parasitism. As such, the picaro survives, in Michel Serres’s ﬁne phrase, as a “tactician of the quotidian.” Within the genre’s comedic arc, the picaro typically pursues a quest of upward mobility; in Animal’s case that quest becomes an elaborate pun subverting any ethical correlation between moral and physical erectness. He is witheringly dismissive of the artistry with which humans—most notably those in power—perform spectacles of rectitude. From his vantage point on humanity, Homo looks neither sapiens nor erectus, but a morally debased species whose uprightness is mostly posturing. Animal’s bent posture, by contrast, embodies a crushing neoliberal, transnational economic relationship and also marks him as a literal “lowlife,” a social and anatomical outlier whose physical form externalizes the slow violence, the unhurried metastases coursing through the community. His penumbral human/posthuman identity places a constant strain on the idea of limits (environmental, economic, ethical, and biological). In refusing the tainted designation “human,” Animal remains for most of the novel deﬁantly otherwise. What one witnesses, then, is Sinha adaptively carrying forward what Giancarlo Maiorino has termed “the antihumanist core of the picaresque.” Together, the antihumanist and parodic strains that permeate the picaresque help Sinha ward off three threats to the dynamism of ﬁ ctional eco-drama: predictability, sentimentality, and a political outrage or self-righteousness that supplants depth of character. Animal, like most picaros, is not expressly political; he positions himself at an angle to Khaupfur’s environmental justice movement and for much of the novel is more troubled by his tenacious virginity than by the toxic tenacity of his environment. Yet, as a product of that environment and as a denizen of the community of the poisoned abject, Animal poses profound questions about the limits and value of the human. He does so, however, not from some concern with abstract justice but from inside the highly unpredictable business of holding body and soul together at street level. Paradoxically, Animal appears as unique but not exceptional: in his singularity he serves as a synecdoche for the spectrum of mutations to which Khaufpuris have been subjected over time, ranging from the celebrated singer with now-ravaged lungs to the chatty Kha-in-a-jar, a double-headed bottled fetus that envies Animal his external, unbottled freedoms. Unmistakably hypervisible, Animal is also by turns undetectable, passing beneath human eye level in a crowd, allowing him to slip porously, in the picaresque manner, between different social strata. But there are spatial limits to how far he can venture in his inﬁltrations and exposes. In a masterstroke, Sinha’s deploys Animal’s physical form as not just a consequence but a condensation of occluded transnational economic relations. His picaro is literally outlandish, his twisted body the physical manifestation of extraterritorial, offshore capitalist practices. The novel tracks the economics of a transnational regime of contamination by posing questions about the limits to bodily integrity, in both the individual and the nation-state. The Kampani’s factory is located yet dislocated, inside India geographically yet elusively aﬂoat, outside the reach (or at least the application) of Indian law. A novel narrated by a human animal—“a beastly boy”— bent out of shape by his foreign load simultaneously questions other forms of mutability, not least the plasticity of ownership, how foreign corporate practices inside India can be owned (for short-term proﬁt) and disowned (for long-term consequences to environmental and human health). To return this dissociative economic logic to a somatic language, we come to see the Kampani as both incorporated and unincorporated into the national body. The Kampani is so compendious, so omnipresent in its effects yet so visibly absent that, at one point, Zafar (leader of Khaufpur’s campaign for justice) declares the Kampani’s faceless power to be eternal. In that despairing moment, we’re given a fused nightmare of neoliberal corporate immunity and corporate immortality. The picaresque proves uncannily effective at dramatizing another critical dimension to the environmentalism of the urban poor—their relationship to time. Like the picaro, the environmentally embattled slum dwellers are hell-bent on immediate survival, improvising from day to day, from hour to hour. Their temporal element is “now o’clock,” their lives subject to the ﬁckle tyranny of the eternal today. Yet collectively, the city’s environmentally afﬂicted are bound in complex ways to past and future through the metamorphoses wrought by toxicity, the pursuit of social justice, and their collective relationship to apocalyptic time. The environmental picaresque of Animal’s People pivots on two apocalypses: the horrors of “that night” when the interminable narrative of poisoning began and the certainty that over the long haul, as the activist Zafar insists, the poor possess “the power of zero.” Global geopolitics may in the short term be skewed against them, but time is on their side: the Kampani has everything to fear from those with nothing to lose. Animal insists as much in the novel’s closing lines: “All things pass, but the poor remain. We are the people of the Apokalis. Tomorrow there will be more of us.” Animal’s ﬁnal words uncannily echo the end of Planet of the Slums, Mike Davis’s powerful account of the contemporary neoliberal shantytown world from which, implicitly, the contemporary picaro emerges. “If the empire can deploy Orwellian technologies of repression,” Davis warns, “its outcasts have the gods of chaos on their side.” Reﬂecting on Hurricane Katrina, Michael Eric Dyson writes memorably of “the color of disaster” as integral to the “neoliberal neglect” that has plagued American politics for over twenty years. In keeping with Dyson’s stance, we can refuse the unsustainable divide between human disasters (like Bhopal and Chernobyl) and natural ones (like Katrina), dissociating ourselves, for example, from former president George W. Bush’s insistence that “the storm didn’t discriminate and neither will the recovery effort.” Discrimination predates disaster: in failures to maintain protective infrastructures, failures at pre-emergency hazard mitigation, failures to maintain infrastructure, failures to organize evacuation plans for those who lack private transport, all of which make the poor and racial minorities disproportionately vulnerable to catastrophe. As investigative Indian reporters, writing for publications like the Hindustan Times and Statesmen were quick to reveal, the Union Carbide disaster was preceded by a long history of structural neglect and a reckless ﬂouting of elementary safety measures. If we project Dyson’s national “color of disaster” onto a transnational screen, his phrase can be seen—like Animal’s apocalyptic ﬁnal words—to point backward to global crimes of environmental racism (that treat certain communities as more expendable than others) and forward as a global portent. The poor of the world are the uncontainable color of a future that cannot be held in check. Yet there is another way to read that future, as a wager—however idealistic—to those in power to embrace the project of more equitable risk distribution, within the nation and beyond. The South African writer Njabulo Ndebele puts this case most forcefully: We are all familiar with the global sanctity of the white body. Wherever the white body is violated in the world, severe retributions follow somehow for the perpetrators if they are non-white, regardless of the social status of the white body. The white body is inviolable, and that inviolability is in direct proportion to the vulnerability of the black body. This leads me to think that if South African whiteness is a beneﬁciary of the protectiveness assured by international whiteness, it has an opportunity to write a new chapter in world history.Putting itself at risk, it will have to declare that it is home now, sharing in the vulnerability of other compatriot bodies. South African whiteness will declare that its dignity is inseparable from the dignity of black bodies. Three points are worth underscoring here. First, that international whiteness provides a second shield for national whiteness, a protective dynamic that has profound consequences for the way slow violence has unfolded across the global stage in a neoliberal age. Second, and relatedly, the internal distance between the inviolable body and the vulnerable body is widened by being routed through international circuits of power. Third, implicit in Ndebele’s racial narrative of violation and retribution is the kind of environmental narrative that Sinha’s novel tells, whereby a corporate bastion of white power deploys a battery of distancing strategies (temporal, legalistic, geographical, scientiﬁc, and euphemistic) in the longue durée between the initial catastrophe and the aftermath. Through this battery of attritional, dissociative mechanisms, the transnational corporation strives to wear down the environmental justice campaigns that seek compensation, remediation, and restored health and dignity. Under cover of a variety of temporal orders, the company can hope that public memory and demands for restitution will slowly seep out of sight, vanishing into the sands of time. Yet the open-ended politics of catastrophic procrastination do not operate in isolation within the corporate realm. What of the roles of the state and science? If Ndebele exhorts the state to “jealously and vigorously protect all bodies within its borders and beyond,” he acknowledges this has seldom been the case. In Khaufpur the Chief Minister and the Minister for Poison Affairs, their palms well greased with bribes, provide local cover for the American Kampani while going through the motions of taking seriously the concerns of exposed locals. The role of science is more complex. In Khaufpur—as in Bhopal—the transnational corporation withheld from the afﬂicted community details about the chemical composition of the insecticides it was producing at the site, profoundly weakening remedial prospects by denying those exposed precise scientiﬁc information. Small wonder that, when an American doctor arrives to open a free clinic in Khaufpur, local activists mount a boycott, viewing her as an agent of tendentious Kampani science—science whose long-term remit is to generate a circular narrative that will conﬁrm the larger narrative of corporate self-exculpation or, at the very least, oil the machinery of doubt. From this skeptical perspective, the scientiﬁc process, like the legal one, provides further temporal camouﬂage, ostensibly uncovering what happened while deferring and occluding any decisive, actionable narrative. Terror Time and Shadow Kingdoms Khaufpur, translated from the Urdu, means “city of terror.” The city’s poorest denizens inhabit a different terror time from the terror time projected by the Kampani. When the slum-dwellers rise up nonviolently to protest the Kampani’s inaction, the Kampani, invoking the fallback international rhetoric of terrorism, demands that the protestors be tried in the very Indian courts the company itself has been evading. Back in America, the Kampani engages in corporate antiterrorist training exercises, staging mock abductions and executions of their employees by Khaufpuri “terrorists.” Khaufpuris, by contrast, face a clear and present danger of an environmental kind: an immanent and imminent terror, faceless yet physically intimate, percolating through the penumbral time of the aftermath that is also the suspended time of the illimitable in-between. We all inhabit multiple temporal orders that often coexist in frictional states, shifting and sliding like tectonic plates. The predominance—and our awareness of—some temporal orders as opposed to others is shaped by where and how we live. We need to ask how directly, how forcefully a given community is impacted by the cycles of sun and moon; by ebbing and ﬂowing tides; by shifts in the seasons, stars, and planets; by the arrivals and departures of migratory life; and by climate change in ways that are crosshatched with the migratory cycles of transnational capital, electoral cycles (local, national, and foreign), digital time, and the dictates of sweatshop time. Sinha hints at, for example, the unpredictable interface between digital and seasonal time when Animal discovers the “internest” on a computer. We can gloss his malapropism as fusing different ecologies of time: the “internest” is, after all, where images go to breed. Animal’s People exposes the uneven timelines and multiple speeds of environmental terror: the initial toxic event that kills thousands instantly; the fatal ﬁre that erupts years later, when the deserted but still-polluted factory reignites; the contaminants that continue to leach into the communal bloodstream; and the monsoon season that each year washes abandoned chemicals into the aquifers, repoisoning wells and producing new cycles of deferred casualties. Thus the initial airborne terror morphs into a waterborne terror that acquires its own seasonal rhythms of heightened risk. Ordinarily, rural subsistence communities—“ecosystem people”—are attuned (and vulnerable) to different ecologies of time from those that impact the lives of the urban poor. This is not to suggest that ecosystem people possess some romantic, timeless, organic bond to the pulse of nature, but rather to acknowledge that their often precarious conditions of survival depend on different combinations of temporal awareness. However, both rural and urban communities share a vulnerability to the vagaries, the haunting uncertainties, of what Ulrich Beck depicts as a “shadow kingdom”: Threats from civilization are bringing about a kind of new “shadow kingdom,” comparable to the realm of the gods and demons in antiquity, which is hidden behind the visible world and threatens human life on their Earth. People no longer correspond today with spirits residing in things but ﬁnd themselves exposed to “radiation,” ingest “toxic levels,” and are pursued into their very dreams by the anxiety of a “nuclear holocaust” Dangerous, hostile substances lie concealed behind the harmless facades. Everything must be viewed with a double gaze, and can only be correctly understood and judged through this doubling. The world of the visible must be investigated, relativized with respect to a second reality, only existent in thought and concealed in the world. In Beck’s depiction this imperceptible shadow kingdom is spatially recessed behind “harmless façades.” But his spatial trope warrants a temporal gloss as well: beyond the optical façade of immediate peril, what demons lurk in the penumbral realms of the longue durée? What forces distract or discourage us from maintaining the double gaze across time? And what forces—imaginative, scientiﬁc, and activist—can help extend the temporal horizons of our gaze not just retrospectively but prospectively as well? How, in other words, do we subject that shadow kingdom to a temporal optic that might allow us to see—and foresee—the lineaments of slow terror behind the façade of sudden spectacle? We need to question here Beck’s assumption that “people no longer correspond today with spirits residing in things,” in other words, that the divine and demonic shadow kingdom “of antiquity” has been superseded by the modern shadow kingdom of toxic and radiological hazards. This sequential narrative of threat does not adequately convey the persistent vitality of the numinous within modernity. For the majority of our planet’s people (and this is something Sinha brings to life) the two kingdoms of toxic threat and spiritual threat interpenetrate and blend, creating a hybrid world of technonuminous fears. Sinha and Carson: Leakages and Corporate Evaporations Animal’s People gives focus to the environmental politics of permeation and duration. Leakages suffuse the novel: gas leakages and category leakages, porous national borders and permeable fetal membranes, the living who are semidead and the dead who are living specters. What, the novel asks across a variety of fronts, are the boundaries of identity? Where do identities part or merge? How much change must an entity (an individual, a community, a corporation) undergo before it can assume the name of categorical difference, drawing a line across time? On the subject of porous identities, it is worth noting one aspect of the Union Carbide story that Sinha, for whatever reasons, declined to enfold into his novel. In,Union Carbide disappeared through that act of corporate necromancy known as the merger. Dow Chemical bought out Union Carbide, and so the name indelibly associated with disaster evaporated, further confounding the quest in Bhopal for environmental justice, compensation, remediation, and redress. Dow Chemical deployed this nominal vanishing act, this corporate shape-shifting, as a rationale for disclaiming responsibility for a disaster committed by a corporation that no longer exists. If with Chernobyl the environmental fallout outlasted the empire responsible, with Union Carbide the fallout outlasted the transnational company responsible. Thus Soviet imperial fracture and American corporate merger both effectively circumvented or off-loaded historical culpability for the continued slow violence of delayed effects. The evaporation of Union Carbide exempliﬁes the gap between the relative immobility of environmentally afﬂicted populations and the mobility (in time and space) afforded transnational corporations. What the extinct company leaves behind is ongoing proof of the excellent durability of its products; as Animal notes sardonically, the Kampani clearly concocted “wonderful poisonsso good it’s impossible to get rid of them, after all these years they’re still doing their work.” The factory may have been abandoned, but the invisible poisons remain dynamic, industrious, and alive— full-time workers around the clock. The far less resilient biota, however, express themselves primarily through the sensuality of absence: “Listen, how quiet,” Animal observes as he wanders the factory grounds. “No bird song. No hoppers in the grass. No bee hum. Insects can’t survive here.” Sinha’s rhetorical strategy here—his summoning of ecological carnage through negative presence—echoes “La Belle Dame sans Merci,” which Rachel Carson chose as the epigraph to Silent Spring: “The sedge is wither’d from the lake, / And no birds sing.” Sinha’s rhetoric calls to mind, too, Carson’s use of negative presence in the controversial “Fable for Tomorrow” that launches Silent Spring, where she evokes the plight of a devastated community. In a once harmonious American heartland town (dubbed Green Meadows in an early draft of Silent Spring), “[t]here was a strange stillness. The birds, for example—where had they gone?The hens brooded, but no chicks hatched.The apple trees were coming into bloom but no bees droned among the blossoms, so there was no pollination and there would be no fruit.” Both Carson and Sinha give the absence wrought by toxicity a sensory density; in so doing they strike a complex temporal note, through blended elegy and apocalypse, lamentation and premonition, inducing in us a double gaze backward in time to loss and forward to yet unrealized threats. Through this double gaze they restage environmental time, asserting its broad parameters against the myopic, fevered immediacy that governs the society of the catastrophe-as-spectacle. The blighted community Carson depicts in “A Fable for Tomorrow” did not exist in its entirety, although all the component disasters Carson fed into her composite, ﬁctionalized portrait had occurred at some point somewhere in America. By clustering these scattered microdisasters into a single imaginary community, she sought to counter the dissociative thinking encouraged by the temporal and spatial dispersion of environmental violence, acts that in isolation would pass beneath the radar of newsworthiness. Like Carson, Sinha has clearly grappled with the imaginative dilemmas posed by the diffusion of slow violence across environmental time. But his response is differently inﬂected, given that all the disasters he summons to mind had indeed been concentrated in a single community. The problem he tackled, moreover, was one Carson never addressed directly: how some afﬂ icted communities are afforded more visibility—and more access to remediation—than others through the mechanisms of globalization, environmental racism, and class discrimination. This discriminatory distribution of environmental visibility—intranationally and transnationally— lies at the heart of Sinha’s ﬁ ctional endeavor. Almost half a century earlier, Carson had protested that the scattershot victims of “herbicides” and “pesticides” ought to be recognized as victims of indiscriminate “biocides” instead. Sinha develops this idea of biocidal risk in terms redolent of Carson: one old Indian woman, bent double by the poisons, upbraids the Kampani lawyer thus: “you told us you were making medicine for the ﬁelds. You were making poisons to kill insects, but you killed us instead. I would like to ask, was there ever much difference, to you?” Yet Sinha departs from Carson in representing “pesticides” as both indiscriminate and discriminatory: their killing power exceeds their targeted task of eliminating troublesome insects, but they do discriminate in the unadvertised sense of saddling the local and global poor with the highest burden of risk. Thus, by implication, the biocidal assault on human life is unevenly universal. Extraordinary Events, Ordinary Forgettings Looking back at Chernobyl, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and Bhopal, Petryna laments how “many persons who have survived these large-scale technological disasters have been caught in a long-term and vicious bureaucratic cycle in which they carry the burden of proof of their physical damage while experiencing the risk of being delegitimated in legal, welfare, and medical institutional contexts.” Such people, the illiterate poor above all, are thrust into a labyrinth of self-fashioning as they seek to ﬁt their bodily stories to the story lines that dangle hope of recognition (possibly, though elusively), even recompense. In so doing, the poor face the double challenge of invisibility and amnesia: numerically, they may constitute the majority, but they remain on the margins in terms of visibility and ofﬁcial memory. From an environmental perspective, this marginality is perpetuated, in part, by what Davis terms “the dialectic of ordinary disaster,” whereby a calamity is incorporated into history and rendered forgettable and ordinary precisely because the burden of risk falls unequally on the unsheltered poor. Such disasters are readily dismissed from memory and policy planning by framing them as accidental, random, and unforeseeable acts of God, without regard for the precautionary measures that might have prevented these catastrophes or have mitigated their effects. At stake here is the role of neoliberal globalization in exacerbating both uneven economic development and the uneven development of ofﬁ cial memory. What we witness is a kind of fatal bigotry that operates through the spatializing of time, by off-loading risk onto “backward” communities that are barely visible in the corporate media. Contemporary global politics, then, must be recognized “as a struggle for crude, material dominance, but also (threaded ever closer into that struggle) as a battle for the control over appearances.” That battle over spectacle becomes especially decisive for public memory—and for the foresight with which public policy can motivate and execute precautionary measures—when it comes to the attritional casualties claimed, as at Bhopal, by the forces of slow violence. We have seen, in recent years, some excellent analytical books about the plight of the international urban underclass by Davis, Jeremy Seabrook, and Jan Breman, among others. However, the kind of visibility such books afford is very different from the visibility offered by a picaresque novel. For even the most eloquent social scientiﬁc accounts of the underclass, like social scientiﬁc accounts of environmental disaster, veer toward the anonymously collective and the statistical. Such accounts thus tend to be in the same gesture humanizing and dehumanizing, animating and silencing. The dilemma of how to represent the underclass, the infrahombres, stands at the heart of the picaresque tradition. Like GraceLand, Chris Abani’s superb picaresque novel about ingenious desperation in a Lagos shantytown, Animal’s People stages a disaggregated irruption of a vivid individual life. Animal, speaking his life story into the Jarnalis’s tape recorder, is all charismatic voice: his street-level testimony does not start from the generalized hungers of the wretched of the earth, but from the devouring hunger in an individual belly. If the novel gradually enfolds a wider community— Animal’s people—it does so by maintaining at its emotional center Animal, the cracked voiced soloist, who breaks through the gilded imperial veneer of neoliberalism to announce himself in his disreputable vernacular. His is the antivoice to the new, ornate, chivalric discourse of neoliberal “free trade” and “development.” Through Animal’s immersed voice, Sinha is able to return to questions that have powered the picaresque from its beginnings. What does it mean to be reduced to living in subhuman, bestial conditions? What chasms divide and what ties bind the wealthy and the destitute, the human and the animal? What does it mean, in the fused imperial language of temporal and spatial dismissal, to be written off as “backward”? In Animal’s day-to-day meanderings, the impulse for survival trumps the dream of collective justice. Yet through his somatized foreign burden— and through the intrepid, blighted lives around him—Sinha exhumes from the forces of amnesia not just the memory of a long-ago disaster but the present and future force of that disaster’s embodied, ongoing percolations. The infrahombres—those who must eke out an existence amidst such percolations—are, the novel insists, also of this earth. Through his invention of the environmental picaresque, Sinha summons to the imaginative surface of the novel the underclass’s underreported lives, redeeming their diverse quirks and hopes and quotidian terrors from what, almost half a millennium ago, Lazaro recognized as “the sepulcher of oblivion.”  Fast-forward Fossil Petro-despotism and the Resource Curse As I ﬁll my tank at the self-service station a bubble of gas swells up in a black lake buried beneath the Persian Gulf, an emir silently raises hands hidden in wide white sleeves, and folds them on his chest, in a skyscraper an Exxon computer is crunching numbers, far out to sea a cargo ﬂeet gets the order to change course. —Italo Calvino, “The Petrol Pump” We are the sons of the Indians who sold Manhattan. We want to change the deal. —Abdallah Tariki, former Director of Petroleum and Mineral Affairs of Saudi Arabia If the twentieth century has been declared, by turns, the American Century and the Century of Oil, it is by now manifest that the twenty-ﬁrst century will be known as neither. We are heading toward a multipolar global order that will depend for its survival on belated—and therefore evermore desperate—responses to uncertain petroleum reserves and mounting climate change. American hegemony has already peaked and (whatever the squabbles over the most likely date) peak oil will follow, ending the dreams of unfettered oil-powered growth that have become inseparable from petroleum’s incendiary geopolitics. In this interregnum between energy regimes, we are living on borrowed time—borrowed from the past and from the future. “Fossil fuels” captures in a phrase this double relationship to planetary time: it suggests, on the one hand, the stratiﬁed death compacted over millennia that technology has enabled us to resurrect as the force that drives our ﬂ eeting, internal combustion civilization. On the other hand, “fossil fuels” also conveys an aura of antiquatedness, of built-in obsolescence inadequate to future needs. For if the fossil record, as a sedimentary script, has been parsed with a host of competing religious, political, and economic motives toward times past and times to come, what remains certain is its ﬁnitude as a source of usable energy. What’s equally certain is that the faster we extract and consume our planet’s compressed hydrocarbon inheritance the greater the likelihood that our actions will propel us—and other living multitudes—toward an abbreviated collective future as fossils in the making. If “fossil fuels” resonates with a sense of time borrowed against an exhaustible past and an exhaustible future, the phrase “resource curse” conveys a different, but complementary, doubleness. “Resource curse” holds in taut suspense notions of fortune and misfortune; the phrase also fuses utilitarian and numinous perspectives on Earth, suggesting the vulnerability of the world of solid, useful goods to spiritual force ﬁelds—the curses and blessings that can have profoundly material effects. Moreover, “resource curse” compresses huge, fraught questions about ownership: what does it mean to be possessed or dispossessed, politically, economically, and spiritually? What are the repercussions of having mineral belongings that literally undermine a community or society’s capacity to belong? And what forces turn belongings—those goods, in a material and an ethical sense—into evil powers that alienate people from the very elements that have sustained them, environmentally and culturally, as all that seemed solid melts into liquid tailings, oil spills, and plumes of toxic air? The notion of the resource curse hinges on the paradox of plenty, whereby nation-states blessed with abundant mineral wealth are too often concomitantly blighted. As a rule of thumb, the greater a state’s reliance on a single mineral resource, the greater the chances that state is undemocratic, militaristic, corruption riddled, and governed without transparency or accountability. Abundant resources are frequently coupled to rampant injustice, fragile economic growth, and low rankings in the United Nations Human Development Index. In strengthening a country’s currency, mineral discoveries may render other economic sectors, like agriculture and manufacturing, less competitive, while the boom-bust cycles of mineral markets exacerbate social volatility. There are of course exceptions to these tendencies, but in resource-cursed societies, a mineral strike, though less immediately spectacular than a missile strike, is often more devastating in the long term, bringing in its wake environmental wreckage, territorial dispossession, political repression, and massacres by state forces doing double duty as security forces for unanswerable petroleum transnationals or mineral cartels. In such societies, a highly concentrated revenue stream is readily diverted away from social and infrastructural investment and into offshore bank accounts. The ties between rulers and ruled are typically weak: the despots or oligarchs prefer to depend—for their private wealth, consumer sprees, extravagant military spending, and power displays—on controlling the central resource than on strengthening civic expectations by introducing taxes, elections, and a diversiﬁed (and therefore less controllable) economy. Under such circumstances, national cohesion and stability may be jeopardized by exaggerated inequalities. These frequently entail both vertical inequality (a widening class chasm between super rich and ultra poor) and horizontal inequality (a geographical gulf between resource-rich enclaves and the remainder of the country). That said, the resource curse, when invoked as a free-ﬂ oating cultural explanation bereft of history, can mislead. Australia and Canada are resource rich but not resource cursed. Is that merely because they are stable, long-established electoral democracies that have avoided the extreme concentrations of power that have blighted monoeconomies like Nigeria, Libya, and Angola? The historical answer is more complicated than that. The “curse” is in part a spin-off of an international legal system that compromised decolonizing nations’ sovereignty over their natural resources. In the s, when efforts to create a New Economic Order collapsed, the European powers and the United States denied newly independent states resource sovereignty by declaring, as Antony Anghie has noted, that such resources were not national in character but belonged to all humanity, by upholding old colonial treaties for resource transfer, and by granting multinational corporations equal international legal standing to third-world states. From Saudi Arabia to Zaire, from Indonesia to Iran, the Western powers typically supported oligarchs, dictators, and military regimes that cooperated with the skewed terms of resource extraction. The Western powers often machinated to topple rulers who objected to these skewed terms. Moreover, Western multinationals typically exerted a disproportionate inﬂuence over the terms of extraction with their third world state partners, inhibiting democratic dispensations from developing while exploiting an environmental, health, and labor climate far more lax than the legislative controls corporations were subject to back home. Hence, international law enabled a single multinational to cultivate divergent standards of operation in the global North and South, a double standard that grew out of—and exacerbated—the historical, structural inequities for which the resource curse has become shorthand. In the global South, oil culture in particular typically brings few new jobs to the locals to replace old forms of communal subsistence jeopardized by fouled water, earth, and air. Multinational oil corporations, seeking a pliable workforce, prefer to import laborers from rival communities or distant lands rather than create jobs for communities most immediately affected by extraction operations. This practice, in turn, impedes labor unions and civic organizations from developing—organizations that could mesh the workplace with the priorities of neighboring communities, whose ostensible resource wealth has reduced them (from the perspective of fossil fuel authoritarians and their partners, the oil majors) to disposable people. From a literary perspective, the idea of the resource enclave achieves a special resonance, for it depends on a profound act of imaginative disconnection. French foreign policy makers, for example, would sometimes divide Africa into Afrique utile and Afrique unitile, the gulf between the useful and the useless bits corresponding largely to those enclaves with exploitable resources that could be proﬁ tably incorporated into metropolitan capitalist structures and the unincorporated, disposable remainder. The tightly garrisoned useful enclaves would be embedded in—yet materially, militarily, and imaginatively removed from—the destitution that surrounded them. Such an enclave mindset is inseparable from another form of imaginative dissociation, namely, rent-seeking behavior, attempts to maximize the often immense chasm between the market value of a resource and the costs of its extraction. Economic rent effects a rending gap in the social fabric, as mining transnationals and collaborative local elites treat a nation’s “natural” bounty as if it were neither of nor for the nation, but exists as a kind of extraterritorial gravy train. In the global South, these multiple practices of economic and imaginative disconnection foster apprehensive nation-states and apprehensive states of mind, in which rulers readily incline toward the paranoid and the great majority who are excluded from the spoils scramble for survival. As these forms of dissociation suggest, to address the resource curse requires that we confront the uses and abuses of enchantment. The eminent Polish journalist Ryzsard Kapuscinski captures something of this sentiment in his Iranian book, The Shah of Shahs, when he observes how “oil creates the illusion of a completely changed life, life without work, life for free, it expresses the eternal human dream of wealth achieved through a lucky accidentin this sense it is a fairy tale and like all fairy tales a bit of a lie.” Jose Ignacio Cabrujas, writing from the other end of the world, exclaims over how Venezuela’s petroleum state turned into a “magnanimous sorcerer Oil is fantastic and induces fantasies. The announcement that Venezuela was an oil country created the illusion of a miracle; it created, in practice, a culture of miracles” propelling the nation “toward a hallucination.” Thus the oil encounter lends itself to populist fairy tales of sudden bounty that easily sour into volatile disillusionment, as people possessed by outsize dreams ﬁnd themselves captive instead to outsize military regimes and the disenchantments of a ruined environment. Abdelrahman Munif and the Oil Encounter For some eighty years, oil has been responsible for more of America’s international entanglements and anxieties than any other industry. In,the United States spent $. billion on imported oil ($ billion of that from OPEC members alone). According to Princeton economic geographer Roger Stern, in the three decades from to,the United States spent a further $. trillion on securing its oil supply from the Middle East. Oil remains a primary source both of America’s strategic vulnerability and of its reputation as a bully, in the Islamic world and beyond. Our appetite for fossil fuels has created a long history of unsavory marriages of convenience with petro-despots, generalissimos, presidents for life, and fomenters of terrorism. Given this history—given the outsize characters, bloated dreams, unscrupulous alliances, double crossings, insurrections, and repressions, given the soaring and plummeting fortunes, one would have expected that the titanic drama of the resource curse would by now have generated a substantial, ambitious literature. This leaves us facing a conundrum. Why is it, as Amitav Ghosh has asked, that the oil encounter has failed to generate a literary response comparable in range and depth to that produced in earlier times by the spice trade? Moreover, one should note that Big Oil certainly hasn’t produced a literature equal in range or magnitude to that generated by its fossil fuel precursor, King Coal, which inspired Emile Zola, George Orwell, Sinclair, Clancey Segal, and D. H. Lawrence, to name but a few. Given the preeminence of oil in America’s destiny, it is startling that not since Sinclair’s California saga Oil! appeared in  has any author hazarded writing the great American oil novel. There is, however, one twentieth-century writer who sought, on an unparalleled scale, to give transnational life to the forbidding subject of oil, a writer alive to oil’s lubrication of human greed, alive to oil’s bewitchments and its disenchanted states, both national and psychological. Between  and  Abdelrahman Munif penned Cities of Salt, a sprawling quintet of novels that engages the broad geography and volatile history of the petroleum encounter. The encounter he dramatizes entails the special relationship, or rather, the special deal between our planet’s biggest petroleum players: Saudi Arabia, the leading producer; and the United States, the principal consumer. Cities of Salt takes shape around the rise of the hydrocarbon despots encouraged, armed, and sustained by American corporate and foreign policy interests. The companion subject of Cities is the growing repression and disillusionment of ordinary Bedouins and their intense, if episodic, insurrectionary response. Munif tracks the psychological and cultural disorientation of Bedouins whose lands and lives the two-headed behemoth of empire and petro-despotism has trampled. The novels—especially the ﬁne ﬁrst volume—deserve to be better known and more widely taught in the United States, not least for their power to illuminate America’s fateful entanglements with Islam and for the chance they offer us to rethink the parameters of environmental literature, transnationally and across the frontiers of genre. The opening volume of Cities of Salt spans the period from to,the very era when Aldo Leopold was enunciating his land ethic, advocating a far-sighted vision of what it means to live responsibly and viably in environmental time. Leopold’s ethic was circumscribed, in some ways, by the particularities of America’s Jeffersonian traditions; he did foresee, however, that to live as an American in the American century was to be a consumer of historically calamitous proportions. He foresaw, too, how the impact of such unchecked resource consumption would be felt disproportionately abroad. In,one year before an American petroleum corporation signed the ﬁrst concession agreement in the Persian Gulf, Leopold wrote: “When I submit these thoughts to a printing press, I am helping to drain a marsh for cows to graze, and to exterminate the birds of Brazil. When I go birding in my Ford, I am devastating an oil ﬁeld, and re-electing an imperialist to get me rubber.” Yet Leopold could do no more than limn these issues in ethical outline from afar. Munif, writing from within the oil encounter’s extractive vortex, could give imaginative dimension to the hydrocarbon force ﬁ elds—the petroleum-driven promises, seductions, coercions, betrayals, and catastrophes—that shaped his region and rippled across the world. Thus his writings—at once historical and premonitory—offer us a unique entry point into one of the twentieth century’s deﬁning stories: the rise of a transnational petro-modernity that contained, from the outset, the seeds of its own undoing. What Munif brings to life, in unparalleled detail, is the profound investment of the foreign and domestic petroleum overlords in quashing democratic aspiration and resource sovereignty. Munif conjures, moreover, a huge chorus of disenfranchised voices, some bewildered, some complicitous, others intrepid in their dissidence, yet all outmaneuvered by American and British imperial forces in league with the oil majors and (if sometimes frictionally so) with the petro-despots too. Munif felt he had been summoned to his theme by the stars: he was born on the very day in  when the Persian Gulf’s ﬁrst concession agreement was signed between the monarch of the newly created Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Abdul Aziz ibn Saud and an American oil corporation, the California Arabian Standard Oil Company. As it transpired, Munif’s ﬁnal book (on Iraqi resistance to imperialism from  to the twenty-ﬁrst century) would appear just months after the  American invasion of Iraq, giving his life a certain symmetry around empire and oil. Although he wrote Cities of Salt before the term “resource curse” had been coined, Munif has bequeathed us the most expansive novelistic account of the Persian Gulf’s early oil conﬂicts that would bring the resource curse in train. Cities of Salt tracks how a nascent transnational oil culture created the foundations for the resource curse, deepening the divide between a narrow class that would become astronomically rich and the uprooted, immiserated masses (from inside and increasingly from beyond the Persian Gulf). Munif’s novels remind us of the perception by French economist, Jacques Attali, that ours is a world increasingly divided into rich and poor nomads, into a wandering elite that travels expansively and a disenfranchised poor whose movements are propelled by misery in a quest for basic goods and rights beyond their grasp. This rift between the mobile rich and wretched, disenfranchised nomads is at its most dramatic in the Gulf States, where such discrepancies foster political volatility among people bound by desperation, oil, Islam, and American and European need. Munif portrayed his novelistic method as the imaginative pursuit of “the deep, internal movement of history,” a history indissociably environmental, political, and cultural. Arguably, his greatest gift was for linking oil’s hybrid lives as a commodity to the oil-induced movements of human populations across oceans and across deserts. Munif himself was perfectly placed as a witness to displacement, for he was (to adapt Bertolt Brecht’s self-portrait) a man given to “changing his country as often as his shoes.” A child of the Arab diaspora, Munif was born in Jordan to an Iraqi mother and a Saudi trader who traveled expansively across the region as the race for oil was transforming it. Munif himself led an improbably peripatetic existence, residing in Jordan, Iraq, Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Yugoslavia, and France. En route he earned a Phd. in oil economics from Belgrade University, edited the Baghdad journal Oil and Development, and worked in the Syrian oil ministry. As such, he was ideally situated to enter into the fantasies purveyed by petroleum’s manipulative emissaries while also addressing the impact of petroleum—through force and fabulation—on Bedouin oral culture. In Munif’s writings about the resource curse, spiritual powers are never immaterial: he is alive to the active energies of the spectral, whether expressed through the opaque enchantments of oil as fetishized commodity or through political resistance inspired by rumors of a shimmering, elusive desert ﬁghter who launches sallies against the foreign dispossessors. Munif is alert, in other words, to the blurring of corporeal and incorporeal powers within the coercive-seductive force ﬁelds of oil imperialism, commodity desire, and the insurrectionary forces ranged against them both. Munif’s involuntary and voluntary movements, his exile and his rovings, were accompanied by a rare range of professional experiences whose one binding thread was petroleum. He was an oil industry insider who also knew, from the inside, what it meant to be dispossessed. Saudi Arabia stripped him of his citizenship; his novels were banned in several Gulf States and Egypt for their excoriating satires of the peninsula’s oil elite; and in his displacements, he felt vulnerable to the suffocating political gamesmanship that pervaded the region. Yet his empathy for the uprooted preceded his own deracinations: his memoir about his Amman childhood sharply enunciates the impact Palestinian refugees had on his political psyche, as they were driven from their lands by the nakbah and streamed into his hometown in the late s, utterly transforming it. In chronicling his region’s oil-induced environmental and cultural upheavals, Munif implicitly distinguishes between the nomadic and the rootless. Nomadic Bedouin culture had been inscribed on the land through movement; theirs was a belonging-in-motion shaped to an arid world. But the deracinations of the oil age plummeted them into a rootlessness that was nomadism’s opposite. Driven from their lands, increasingly urbanized, repressed and exploited by a corrupt sepoy class in cahoots with American oil interests, many lower-class Bedouin found themselves culturally humiliated and politically estranged. Writing and Political Agency To write against the corrupting intimacies between petro-despots and the oil majors can be a life-threatening enterprise. Ken Saro-Wiwa was executed for doing as much; George Aditjondro, the vocal Indonesian intellectual who wrote fearlessly about his nation’s oil-driven authoritarianism, was forced into exile, as was Munif after the Saudis revoked his citizenship and issued threats. Moving from country to country, Munif became, in his words, an “uninvited guest” whose exiled presence could be wielded by the Saudis (and others hostile to his views) against any state that hosted him. Yet through all those upheavals he refused to temper his outspokenness on the region’s root corruptions. “Our crisis,” he once declared, “is a trilogy: oil, political Islam, and dictatorship.” Cities of Salt was pitched against that trilogy of fused calamities. In Cities—and across the broad swathe of his writings—Munif exposed the perﬁdies of the petro-despots, the spread of the carceral state, and the costs borne by those who (from oases to city streets) clamored for resource sovereignty, political answerability, socialism, civil liberties, or participatory democracy. By shuttling between ﬁction and nonﬁction, Munif exposed the imperial underpinnings of that trilogy of calamities, bearing witness to the ways American and British petroleum powers—whether in competition or collaboration, whether backed by the CIA or MI or both—cynically fomented and funded political Islam, propped up petro-despots, helped subvert or assassinate democratically elected leaders, and thwarted street-level efforts to advance a more equitable spread of regional oil wealth. Munif maintained an insistent belief that writing could be a tool for change. To that end, he adopted a multigenre assault on both the Persian Gulf elites and their foreign collaborators. However, unlike most writers under consideration in this book, Munif’s faith in literature’s instrumental value was neither integral to his organizational activism (as with Saro-Wiwa, Maathai, and Ndebele) nor supplementary to an already established literary career (as with Roy, Sinha, Carson, and Gordimer). For if Munif turned to literature belatedly (he was forty before his ﬁrst novel, Trees and the Assassination of Marzuq, appeared in ), that turn marked a withdrawal from organizational politics and a reentry into politics through a different door. Disillusioned with organized resistance, he determined to become a full-time writer, which he saw as a compensation—albeit in his view an inadequate one—for the social transformations that he’d once hoped the region’s radical movements would provide, before they were crushed, corrupted or collapsed through self-immolation. From his student days onward, Munif had plunged into a dizzying array of political organizations, variously and in combination, socialist, democratic, nationalist, pan-Arabist, and Baathist. But by the late s his faith in movement politics had been exhausted: repression by despotic forces from within and subversion by imperial forces from without had resulted in surging imprisonments, executions, disappearances, torture, and banishments. Above all, it was the Six Day War that propelled Munif to channel his political energies in a literary direction. Reﬂecting on the impact of that war, Munif recalled how “the defeat of  pushed [him] toward the novel not as a means of escape but of confrontation. It had an unforgettable effect: to see such a vast area as the Arab world—with all its enormous clamour and slogans—crumble and fall, not just in six days but a mere few hours.” In turning to literature during that aftermath, he sought to redeem the oppositional capacities of language from such clamorous sloganeering, a task he undertook through the complementary possibilities offered him by ﬁ ctional and nonﬁ ctional forms. Munif belonged to a post–World War II generation emboldened by decolonization, inspired by nationalism and socialism, and burdened “with an immense load of dreams and desires for change.But our dreams were greater than our resources.” Faced with waning possibilities for organized resistance, Munif envisioned literature as an alternative resource. Perhaps literature might offer some modest counter to the surreal, unmoored worlds of despotism aﬂoat on oil; might offer some anchorage in history, some space for dreaming and for insurrectionary acts of memory, aspiration, and satirical exposé. Munif became a writer-activist, then, through a disengagement from rather than an immersion in movement politics. In this diverted realm Munif secured for himself, amidst the precariousness of exile, some element of imaginative sovereignty and purposeful hope. An unsettled man, literature became his place of displaced possibility. He found himself writing into the headwinds of ongoing, region-wide crises. He responded with essays, polemics, and manifestos on (among other things) how to reorganize the oil industry. He responded, too, with novels, mostly either allegorical fables steeped in oral tradition or historical epics that blended in semiallegorical elements. This allegorical propensity—and his refusal to name a society that provided the setting for any novel, even when it was recognizably, say, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, or Iran—served a double purpose. On the one hand, it allowed him political deniability. But perhaps more signiﬁ cantly, it marked him as a resolutely regional writer in a transnational (rather than a Thomas Hardy) sense. Munif insisted that his region’s commonalities were more striking—and more politically consequential— than its internal differences. He viewed the region as, among other things, one vast carceral state: “the political prison exists from the Atlantic to the Gulf,” he declared, a sentiment that found dramatic expression in his most famous novel, East of the Mediterranean, set in a typically unnamed despotic state. In a similarly regionalist gesture, he observed how “the Bedouin oil blessing, which at one time was conﬁned to the desert, has moved to all Arab cities and become the force deﬁning not only politics but culture, ways of life, and the human concerns in this region.” These remarks give voice to Munif’s paired imaginative obsession with imprisonment on the one hand and movement (upheaval, banishment, exile) on the other: his writings return again and again to the visitations of involuntary immobility and involuntary mobility that have bedeviled his region. By not specifying the locations of his novels Munif sought to limit the risk that a nation-speciﬁc critique could be read as exculpating other equally heinous regimes in the region. His ﬁction works, as it were, through inverse speciﬁcity. By amassing sensory, cultural, geographical, and historical detail he writes against the forces of amnesia, censorship, and repression, creating the impression of whole societies that are, nonetheless, never reducible to themselves. His broad regionalism is underscored by his recurrent commitment to a transnational justice at once cultural and environmental, powerfully established through ﬁgurative counterpoints between, on the one hand, oil culture’s invisible maneuverings and material excesses; and on the other, the transparent, modest, and regenerative life of the grove. If the oil realm is geologically subterranean, politically opaque, rife with secret concessions and imperial back room deals, the realm of the grove— whether olive, date, lemon, orange, or almond—is the realm of provender and provenance. Munif was especially alert to the impact of the uprooted grove on human ecology: to trees as bioregional and historical stakeholders, as palpable markers of contested memory, as standard bearers of sustainable life and equally of cultural dignity. His own improbably uprooted life, his profoundly inhabited sense of deracination’s rending, intensiﬁed his predilection for humanizing his region’s trees and for arborealizing its people. That tendency comes to a head in the ﬁrst volume of Cities of Salt, during the intense scenes of ﬁrst contact between American petroleum prospectors and the people of the oasis, as Munif gives ﬁ ctional form to the events that would lead to the ﬁrst American oil company concession in the Persian Gulf, to the completion in  of the Trans-Arabian Pipeline and, in the novel’s explosive later pages, to the worker strikes that shook Dhahran in. The Oasis as Resource Frontier The oasis scenes in Cities of Salt mark the ﬁrst skirmishes in an imperial resource war that would bring, not far behind it, the ﬁrst premonitions of the resource curse. Like many scenes of ﬁrst contact, this is a war that isn’t a war, or at least one that doesn’t announce itself as such; initially, it simply appears to involve the arrival of bewildering strangers whose advent gives no inkling of the extensive violence to follow. But we can read the encounter between the oasis community and these newcomers—three American oil prospectors and their two marsh Arab guides—as an epochal, if as yet inchoate, contest between a desert culture historically shaped around water wealth and interlopers following a different wealth script, in which “resource rich” means oil. Hitherto, water (and its dependent trees) had been the foundational bounty—connecting past to future, time to space, place to movement, agriculture to nomadism. In this context, water sustained tradition as what Amiri Baraka once called “the changing same”; it was water that underlay a culture of continuity-within-ﬂux responsive to ecological vicissitudes, a culture infused with cosmological belonging and steeped in a history of nomadic cosmopolitanism. Over the course of Cities of Salt we witness the Americans (in collusion with a far-off emir) uproot this water-based culture and supplant it, without explanation or consultation, with a petroleum-ﬁxated culture. This tectonic shift in resource priorities is accompanied by a profound temporal rupturing: oasis deep time (inseparably cultural and ecological) becomes subordinated to petroleum culture’s swaggering sense of an even deeper time, one premised on an apparently inﬁnite geological generosity fueling an apparently inﬁnite future wealth. The newcomers’ hubris disdains the idea of limits: the decisive time frame changes from a cyclical, seasonally renewable culture that prizes water time to a culture dominated by oil time’s linear narrative, in which concerns regarding sustainability get crushed by an onrushing developmental ideology, purportedly universal in its generosity. (“Wait, just be patient, and all of you will be rich!” the Americans declare upon arrival.) In the background, we have the slow time of hydrocarbon’s geological accretions and in the foreground, the accelerated time of petro-modernity’s primitive accumulation. If primitive accumulation generally combines a history “of force, of dispossession, and enclosure,” in the case of petroleum, we confront primitive accumulation of a special type. Fernando Coronil, writing in a Venezuelan context, is pertinent here, particularly his incisive thinking about the distinctive character of “nature-exporting societies.” Coronil remarks on how “the tension between the natural origin of the nation’s ﬁnite collective wealth and the private destiny of its social appropriation shaped the contest between democracy and dictatorship.” However, in Saudi Arabia, far more acutely than in Venezuela, the oppositional forces were never able to mount a signiﬁcant democratic challenge because they faced a more daunting set of collusions—between empire, petro-capitalism, and the House of Saud. Saudi Arabia, after all, was a society where in  a Us. ambassador could boast that America possessed its own “oil colony.” If the etymological ties between nature and nation were deployed in the United States to mythologize the society as “nature’s nation,” in Saudi Arabia that logic resurfaced in heightened form. Soon after American prospectors had made their ﬁ rst oil strike in the Persian Gulf, the United States oversaw the creation and “independence” of Saudi Arabia; and so, through a gesture of simultaneous decolonization and colonization, an outpost of “nature’s nation” was engineered into birth. The new nation’s “natural” bounty was promoted from the outset as imminent wealth for all its newly minted “independent” citizens, while simultaneously being privatized by imperial need and familial monopoly. The result was a paradigmatic instance of what Wm. Roger Louis and Ronald Robinson have aptly called “the imperialism of decolonization.” Cities of Salt chronicles the emergence of a nature-exporting, client nation-state premised on ruined ecologies. The novel’s thinly disguised Saudi Arabia possesses a natural bounty so vast and monolithic that it inhibits economic, infrastructural, and civic diversity, encouraging instead highly stratiﬁed social relations, highly concentrated power, and an international feedback loop of corruption and repression. These inequities are set in motion by the ﬁrst oil concessions at the desert oases that, like the “purchase” of Manhattan from the Native peoples, bore no earthly relation to the long-term market value of the resource. Thus, in the ofﬁ cial narratives, the oasis was typically represented as a remote, “primitive,” worthless place redeemed by the arrival of American technology that allowed nature’s beneﬁcence to ﬂ ower. It might be productive, then, to approach Cities of Salt as an unofﬁ cial, contrarian imaginative history of the oasis as resource frontier. From this perspective, Munif can be seen to use the technology of the novel—the novel as paperwork—to script petro-capitalism’s contradictions, contradictions papered over by American and Saudi public relations that crafted a seamless developmental narrative from which oil imperialism and petrodespotism were both carefully excised. As such, Munif’s novels take shape (in form and impulse) as works of disenchantment: they dispel the bureaucratic necromancy whereby Saudi Arabia appeared as an autochthonous nation-state blessed with impeccable natural credentials. What emerges in Munif’s denaturing of the petroleum nation-state is a tension between different geometries of environmental time: at the prepetroleum oasis, or wadi, a cyclical set of expectations prevails, one that acknowledges both scarcity and replenishment, whereas the ofﬁ cial, linear, developmental narrative of the naturally rich nation-state suppresses notions of ﬁ nitude and stewardship. Thus the twilight of the wadi and the dawning of the petroleum state mark the fall and rise of incompatible cultures of benediction: Wadi al-Uyoun was an ordinary place to its inhabitants, and excited no strong emotions, for they were used to seeing the palm trees ﬁlling the wadi and the gushing brooks surging forth in the winter and early spring, and felt protected by some blessed power that made their lives easy. This known, inhabited ecology of good fortune stands in contrast to the unknown fortune that has yet to materialize from the rhetoric of oil riches. When the wadi’s representatives travel to their emir to oppose the American presence, he reassures them that “there are oceans of blessings under this soil” and that the foreigners have traveled from “the ends of the earth to help us.” We can read this scene as a showdown between different temporal visions as well as divergent ecologies of scale: a showdown between the wadi, a visible place of ﬁnite bounty; and the invisible realms—those “oceans of blessings” below and “the ends of the earth” beyond—that are reputedly conspiring, through geological and technological generosity, to put an end to scarcity. The people of the wadi ﬁrst experience oil’s blessings as violation; the Americans, having probed the soil at Wadi-al-Uyoun, vanish then reappear in “yellow iron hulks.” The “unearthly” machines are neither of nor for this earth: They descended like ravenous wolves, tearing up the trees and throwing them to the earth one after another, and leveled all the orchards between the brook and the ﬁelds. After destroying the ﬁrst grove of trees, the tractors turned to the next with the same bestial voracity and uprooted them. The trees shook violently and groaned before falling, cried for help, wailed, panicked, called out in helpless pain and then fell entreatingly to the ground, as if trying to snuggle into the earth to grow and spring forth alive again. The trees had anchored community and enabled a blend of nomadic and semiagrarian subsistence. As the machines rip up the roots—and routes—of the culture, they rip through the temporal fabric of oasis ecology, whereby life returns to the earth for cyclical retreat and regeneration. Furthermore, the assaults on the oasis set up a conﬂict between the micropolitical culture of the once sovereign grove and the transnational macropolitics of concession—in the fullest political, psychological, geological, and environmental sense of concession. In the second phase of oil’s benediction, the wadi’s now homeless people get displaced to a coastal reﬁnery town, Harran, where they ﬁnd themselves housed in furnace-like metal shacks and remade as laborers in a wage economy under foreign mastery. The worker compound is segregated from the transplanted American suburban enclave—in a Persian Gulf rendition of Jim Crow. At day’s end, the workers part like streams coursing down a slope, one broad and one small, the Americans to their camp and the Arabs to theirs, the Americans to their swimming pool, where their racket could be heard in the nearby barracks behind the barbed wire. When silence fell the workers guessed the Americans had gone into their air-conditioned rooms whose thick curtains shut everything our: sunlight, dust, ﬂies, and Arabs. Thus the undifferentiated oil blessing becomes institutionalized as class distinction and racial segregation: nature’s unbounded bounty becomes incrementally bounded, privatized, partitioned. On the poor side of the wire, that bounty is reduced to the noises of luxury rising from the far side of the barricade and to the inner noise of yearning. Inarguably, a romantic strain suffuses Munif’s elegiac depictions of the pre-petroleum oasis—as harmonious, almost paradisal, compared to the divided, divisive world that would ensue. Munif falls back on tropes familiar from other postcolonial or neocolonial literatures to project an atmosphere of conjoined ecological integrity and cultural authenticity. Certainly, if in an American context, Shepard Krech has argued that it is historically inaccurate and politically dubious to propagate the myth of the Ecological Indian, one could make a similar case for the dangers of a reductively mythologized Ecological Bedouin. In fairness, Munif does temper his Edenic oasis authenticity by underscoring the droughts, famines, and calamities that have historically beset the place. It is not as if the wadi is a stranger to violence; rather that petro-capitalism’s arrival introduces a violence of unprecedented magnitude and irreversible consequences. If Ken Saro-Wiwa sometimes sought to defend Ogoni rights by mobilizing a dubious discourse of impermeable cultural authenticity, so too Munif’s romance with authenticity has some problematic fallout. We witness this, for example, when the textured sympathy he extends to the wadi’s cosmopolitan nomads is not extended to the cosmopolitan foreign workers who arrive from Asia and from across the Middle East: Once Harran had been a city of ﬁshermen and travelers coming home, but now it belonged to no one; its people were featureless, of all varieties and yet strangely unvaried. They were all of humanity and yet no one at all, an assemblage of languages, accents, colors and religions. At moments like this, foreignness per se—whether embodied by American petroleum overlords or by the Yemeni, Sri Lankan, Egyptian, Bangladeshi, and Indian immigrant underclass—gets collapsed into the If the elegiac oasis scenes depend on familiar, troubling postcolonial tropes, in Munif ’s case those scenes assume an autobiographically inﬂected melancholy. As a child, he traveled widely with his family of small-time traders; their wanderings traversed national divides before the . of lossoniﬁ gurat region’s nation-states existed. Munif recalls in interview how “we brought ﬂour from Amman to Saudi Arabia and, at the same time, brought salt and dates from Saudi Arabia back to Jordan. This was the speciﬁc kind of trade that I did in my youth.” During this period, encountering an oasis would have been emotionally momentous for the boy. So Munif had profound familial reasons for nostalgia and rage when he witnessed this tradition of traversal traduced (or at least unrecognizably transformed) by petrocapitalism’s dictates. An abrupt transition from an economy dispersed around nodal oases to a centralized, client nation-state presided over by an oil corporation transforms cultures of exchange—of stories as well as goods. Exchange deﬁnes the oasis almost as much as water: an oasis is not an enclave, it is a place where (to adapt James Clifford’s terms) rootedness is routed through the constancy of movement. An oasis is a place of passage that blends the agrarian and the nomadic, an ecosystem as way station and thoroughfare. Indeed, without the Bedouin caravans and the ﬂux of nonhuman migrant living forms as well, the wadi would soon wither. So the arrival of visitors at Wadi al-Uyoun is scarcely an isolated event; nor is the wadi a stranger, even, to the visitations of imperialism. Locals recall how during Ottoman times, Jazi al-Hathal and his forces would ambush Turkish invaders who had seized the wadi for themselves, eventually forcing them to withdraw. What is perplexing about the Americans is the way they exempt themselves from the cultures of exchange that animate the oasis. They arrive with equipment, but no goods to trade and no stories. Possessed of a bewildering incuriosity, they reserve their most intense investigations for the earth below, not the surface people; bewitched by the unseen geology, the Americans remain indifferent to the eco-cultural history. Their presence along the margins of the oasis is acquisitive not inquisitive; the newcomers stand inscrutably outside the wadi’s dense culture of narrative and commercial exchange. If Munif’s writing about the oasis takes on tones of anticipatory elegy (for an authenticity simpliﬁed and heightened in remembrance), he nonetheless conveys the cosmopolitan complexity of oasis culture before it was ecologically, culturally, economically, and psychologically unsettled by an instrumental rationality that saw only fossil fuels and relic people, impedimentary Bedouin who, in the name of civilization, modernity, and proﬁt had to be moved and forcibly remade. Provincializing America: Wilderness and the Frontiers of Genre In,when Peter Theroux’s English translation of the ﬁrst volume of Cities of Salt appeared, the most prominent American response came from John Updike, who reviewed it for the New Yorker. Updike disliked the novel intensely, for political and formal reasons. The grounds for his distaste are worth examining because they open up large questions about the frontiers of genre in relation to transnational frontier literatures. What would it mean to disturb the conventions of Us. frontier and wilderness literature through what Anne McClintock has called America’s “offshore histories”? To what extent, in engaging a history as vast, as multifarious, as that of the resource curse, is the novel itself an adaptable resource? How, moreover, do the geological, geopolitical, and technological translations of an oral culture’s vernacular landscapes into petro-capitalism’s ofﬁ cial landscapes impact the refraction of oral community through the written technology of the novel? And ﬁnally, in the canons of environmental literature, what can we learn from novels that simultaneously globalize and provincialize America, envisioning America from abroad, from the outside in, thereby reconﬁguring America’s weight in the world? Updike poses none of these questions, yet the angle of his approach allows us to engage them productively. He bristles at the novel’s stance toward America: Cities of Salt is suffused with a hostility that shows, he argues, that “the maledictory rhetoric of the Ayatollah Khomeini is nothing new.” But Updike’s more elaborate quarrel concerns Munif’s formal incompetence. Acknowledging the epic potential of the oil theme, Updike laments that this Arab author is “insufﬁciently Westernized to produce a narrative that feels much like what we call a novel.” Here the bogeymen of authenticity and progress narratives both rear their heads again: Updike’s proprietary “we” casts Munif as an uncomprehending outsider, peripheral to the central narrative of the novel’s development. This Arab is a neophyte; he may get there, but not yet. The markers of this foreigner’s insufﬁciency, Updike argues, are twofold: he fails at character and he fails at voice. Above all, the novel doesn’t work because Munif botches character: “no single ﬁgure acquires enough reality to attract our sympathetic interest.There is none of that sense of individual moral adventurewhich, since Don Quixote and Robinson Crusoe, has distinguished the novel from the fable and the chronicle; Cities of Salt is concerned, instead, with men in the aggregate.” The effect, Updike concludes snifﬁly, is simply “sociological.” Updike thus seeks to give his generic complaint a genealogical authority; Munif, whether out of ignorance or disrespect, has failed to pay homage to the master genealogy. (There is something superbly apposite about Updike’s bewildered response to this Arab interloper’s unfathomable novel about Arab bewilderment at the unfathomable ways of American interlopers.) Yes, Munif breaks with the dominant traditions of the European and American novel, but his iconoclasm is not wholly eccentric: he is scarcely alone in working with a crowded canvas and with themes of collective transformation. His approach has much in common with Upton Sinclair’s hugely populous epic, Oil!, which certainly had no use for Robinson Crusoe as a viable forebear. Sinclair, like Munif, was imaginatively ﬁred by social convulsions that occur at high speed and on a vast scale: both oil frontier writers were fascinated by the land heists; the snake oil artists; the naïfs and faux-naïfs; the corporate ruthlessness; the economic and imaginative speculation; the surge in wealth and poverty; and the emergence, manipulation, and insurrections of an extraction industry working class. Both writers were fascinated, moreover, by technologies of power, technologies that, in the explosive mix of hope and servitude they deliver, are tinged with an atmosphere of apocalypse. Above all, Munif and Sinclair bear imaginative witness to the collisions (and collusions) between old religious cosmologies and new ones, between the preachers and the preachers of proﬁ t, between damnation or paradise in the afterlife and the satanic or redemptive possibilities created by an unearthly oil-rush. The novelistic strategies that Munif favors are also redolent of those that shape collective ﬁctions of modernization like Emile Zola’s Germinal (Cities’ great hydrocarbon forebear) and Ousmane Sembene’s Les bouts de bois de Dieu (God’s Bits of Wood). Munif, Zola, and Sembene are fascinated by the germination of revolt, the seeding of collective dissent—whether among coal miners in s northern France, railroad workers in s French West Africa, or Trans-Arabian Pipeline workers in s Saudi Arabia. To this end, all three writers spurn an individual or familial focus, opting instead for a collective approach to character and form as they track across the sprawling canvases of societies in violent ﬂux working class, peasant, and nomadic responses to injustices wrought by the onset of industrial modernity. As such, in recasting historical worker uprisings all three writers also remodel the conventions of the novel, treating orality as an imaginative resource and individual character as secondary to collective metamorphoses. The resultant novels are all positioned at some dramatic interface between capitalism’s primitive accumulations, an assailed environment, and an insurrectionary labor movement. One can be drawn to the ambition of such novels or not; the fact is, they exist and many readers have been moved by them. Updike’s genealogical allegiances—and his affective preferences—are quite different: whatever else Updike’s novels contain, they eschew multitudes. His native terrain is the sparsely populated crabgrass frontier, where tumult takes the guise of (often almost inaudible) disturbances that rumble through suburbia. Updike’s regionalism is internal to the nation and his imagination contoured to a particular strip and social stratum of America’s northeast corridor, whereas Munif is a transnational regionalist whose imagination roams from Morocco to Iran. Munif’s fascination with epic, tectonic convulsions is at the furthest remove from the assumed solidity—emotionally deep but geographically narrow—that Updike cites as his own creative foundation: “The street, the house where I had lived [in Shillington, PA], seemed blunt, modest in scale, simple; this deceptive simplicity composed the inhabitants’ precious, mystical secret, the conviction of whose existence I had parlayed into a career, a message to sustain a writer book after book.” Munif knew no such house. Imaginatively, he was housed and fed by homelessness; he never possessed a categorical nationality or a conclusive homeland. He understood what it meant to live and travel as a problem. He bore witness in his writings to upheaval after upheaval—the nakbah that drove Palestinian refugees into Jordan, the Nasserite revolution, the Suez Crisis, the  Arab-Israeli War, the Lebanese civil war, Sabra and Shatila, the Iranian revolution, the intafadah, the Iran-Iraq War, the Persian Gulf War, and the  Iraq War shortly before his death. He felt drawn at a monumental and a micropolitical level to deracination as a theme: to societies and subjectivities rapidly undone and remade, not least at the ruined oasis and in the company town through petro-capitalism’s dominion. His profound empathy for uprooted ecologies and communities carried over into his empathy for the reﬁnery town’s bewildered workers, betrayed by the oil blessing, workers whose experience of subsistence time had become shrunken and precarious: No one knew if they would remain alive or if tomorrow they would ﬁnd food. True the company paid them, but what they received today was spent on the following day. Prices kept rising from day to day and money was accumulating in a few hands. As for the promises of houses and a comfortable life which Ibn al-Rashid had made them years ago as he herded them from ‘Ajara and other places, they had vanished even before Ibn al-Rashid himself. And as for the promises of the personnel ofﬁce in the company to build houses for the workers to enable them to bring their families over and return home in the evening to wife and children, years had passed without a single house being built. This is not to suggest that Munif had been unhoused by history in as profound a sense as his ﬁctional reﬁnery town workers. Yet he was sufﬁ ciently intimate with statelessness; with censorship; with being threatened, banished, or shunted about by regimes inimical to his voice to have, as his place of imaginative departure, a sense that place itself is fragile, irredeemably provisional, always vulnerable to history’s storms. That certain knowledge of uncertainty permeated the way he imagined the environment, social ecologies, and the novel as a form. When Updike bemoans Munif’s failure to deliver the obligatory “individual moral adventure,” one senses beneath the surface of that judgment a set of assumptions not just about what a proper novel should look like but, more speciﬁcally, about what the frontier novel should look like a la Americaine, replete with individualistic male moral adventurers (or homosocial twosomes) riding westward across a panoramic wilderness of boundless threat and boundless promise. To provincialize such sentimental interpretations of the frontier novel entails that we address the allied challenge of provincializing wilderness literature. It feels apposite that the ﬁrst volume of Munif’s quintet, a work enlivened by scenes of cross-cultural misreadings, should itself be known in English through an act of mistranslation— or rather, by an inability to translate the untranslatable. Peter Theroux’s English version assumes the charismatic title of the quintet as a whole—Cities of Salt—rather than attempting to ﬁnd an adequate rendition of Munif’s title, ‘al-Tih. When this discrepancy is mentioned at all, ‘al-Tih is briskly translated as “the wilderness.” But the Arabic phrase suggests something more resonant, more dynamic than that: ‘al-Tih refers not merely to wilderness as place, but to wilderness as an existential human condition, the state of being lost in the wilderness. This human lostness, this wilderness bewilderment is, I would suggest, vital to the expansive reach and reverberant power of Munif’s novel. If ‘al-Tih is a transnational masterpiece of Arab literature, as is conventionally observed, then it also warrants being read with a supplementary set of transnational questions in mind, among them this: how can such a novel help us rethink the conventional parameters of American wilderness literature? Arabic literature boasts an immense tradition of wilderness literature in which the desert ﬁgures variously as a place of obliteration, threat, derangement, prophecy, and purifying promise. Yet the narrative arc of ‘altih—from wadi to reﬁnery town—disturbs any straightforward opposition between oasis civilization and desert barbarism. The most threatening desert marauders, the barbarians out there, are by implication imperialism’s primitive accumulators. The full force of the novel’s titular bewilderment is felt when the Bedouin characters are thrust into the high-speed, unintelligible chaos of the company town—the urban wilderness that is petromodernity’s cultural creation. By now, a considerable critical literature has accrued in an American context around the constructedness of wilderness—the fencings, the framings, the human evictions and erasures—in short, the cultural heavy lifting that has gone into evacuating cultural history from the concept and experience of wilderness. Munif’s ‘al-Tih offers an innovative angle on the enterprise of American wilderness creation by erasure, not in Alaska or Wyoming, but way offshore in the Persian Gulf. What we witness are nomadic Bedouins rapidly remade as settled construction workers and tasked with constructing an urban wilderness that becomes the very condition of their dispossession and historic invisibility. ‘Al-Tih thereby creatively reframes some profound questions, especially this: how can the wilderness novel help us reconceive the dynamic between imperial resource frontiers and the frontiers of genre? One productive resource for addressing such questions is Robert Vitalis’s richly archived history on Us.-Saudi relations, America’s Kingdom: Mythmaking on the Saudi Oil Frontier. Although Vitalis does not engage the novel as a genre, he is profoundly engaged, as his subtitle announces, by frontier mythologies. Vitalis uses ARAMCO archives and private correspondence to dispel the myths of American exceptionalism promulgated by the oil consortium’s richly funded propaganda machine. The consortium habitually contrasted enlightened American practices in the Middle East with those of the benighted British, using the language of partnership, mutual respect, benign incorporation, development, and nation building to advance the story line that Us. expansion into the Persian Gulf was anticolonial in spirit and thereby consistent with a long, honorable tradition of sensitive cross-cultural uplift that animated American exceptionalism. Yet as Vitalis succinctly puts it: “America can only be seen as avatar of a more humane twentieth-century abroad against the atavism of European empire by leaving out the unbroken legacy of conquest and subjugation at home.” Vitalis insists that the American West and the Saudi East Coast be read as conjoined frontiers held together by recycled tropes, myths, and political practices adaptively redeployed from the subjugation of Native American tribes to the creation, through coercive treaties and broken promises, of a “sovereign” Saudi nation. By exploring the company’s private (and sometimes inadvertently public) utterances, Vitalis reveals how the rhetoric used to vindicate the internal colonization of Native peoples in the American West was reengineered and projected outward to justify an American imperialism that, while waving the banner of enlightened anti-colonialism, was securing for itself an oil colony on the Persian Gulf ’s eastern shores. Many of the same personnel—Oklahoma and Texas oilmen, some doubling as the kind of CIA operatives who machinate in Munif’s The Trench—adapted the practices of Western mining camps to the oil camps they established in the Persian Gulf. These practices included Jim Crow segregation; racialized pay structures; violent assaults on would be unionizers and civil rights campaigners; and what one oilman termed, in private correspondence, the cultivation of “a Texas herrenvolk atmosphere.” In trying to codify their relations to the Arabs and their lands, the oilmen repeatedly analogized to the American “encounter” with Indians back West. Moreover, in order to legitimate their Us.-dependent petrooligarchy, the Saudi elite in turn would learn to reinvent their history in terms assimilable to Us. narratives of benign nation-building, developmental ascent, and glorious progress. (Without, of course, any reference to democracy.) The ﬂag, the national anthem-tooting brass bands, the national costumery were all marshaled for parades of self-determination. ARAMCO public relations man Patrick Flynn, reminiscing about Arab-American relations during the opening decades of the oil encounter, gets positively dewy eyed: The early American oilmen coming to Saudi Arabia were extraordinary pioneers. They combined the can-do ingenuity of dedicated Americans with a great affection for the people and their customs.Living with the Bedouins, sharing the hardships of life with the people in the desert and in town, they gained the respect and admiration of the Arabs.The early Americans, it has to be understood, loved the Saudi Arabian people. They loved the country and spent their lives there in dedicated labor. There was no salary that could inspire such an outpouring and sacriﬁce, only love and affection. With that said, Franklin Roosevelt could still blithely declare that he “could do anything that needed to be done with Ibn Saud with a few million dollars.” Against such a backdrop we are better positioned to revisit Updike’s complaint that Munif was too ignorant of novelistic conventions and insuf.ﬁciently Westernized to convert his material into a memorable pioneering adventure. Might Cities of Salt represent less a missed opportunity than a canny effort to push back, imaginatively and politically, against the frontier novel as heroically individualized pioneer romance? Instead of crafting an adventurer who faces down some Persian Gulf version of the wilderness and Native Americans, Munif summoned to life a radically different kind of historical panorama, a violent conﬂict on a communal scale, as the uprooted Bedouin fought for ecological subsistence, cultural dignity, and scraps of power against an advancing petro-capitalist imperialism in league with an emergent oligarchic client state. Orality, Geology, and Writing: The Technologies of Encounter The narrative voice of Cities (disdained by Updike as that of “a campﬁre explainer”) enables Munif to recast genre by blending elements drawn from oral fabulation into the epic historical novel. Cities is not a sustained work of what Jennifer Wenzel (with reference to Nigerian literature) calls petro-magic-realism. Yet if the quintet contains nothing as fully phantasmagoric as, say, “What the Tapster Saw,” Ben Okri’s story about Niger Delta petro-modernity, Cities is peppered with scenes of cross-cultural mistranslation where the inexplicable, the hallucinatory, and the realistic converge. These nodal, often humorous scenes of apparent magic coalesce around technological encounters, as Munif simulates, from a Bedouin perspective, the complex emotions triggered by the arrival of a procession of technologies from beyond all possible belief: the radio, the air conditioner, the generator, the telephone, the thermos, and the automobile. The mixed sentiments the Bedouins feel on encountering these signs taken for wonders—the incredulity, the terror, the yearning—are intensiﬁ ed by the fact that only the Americans and the emir can own such things. The marvels exist but are unavailable; in their enchantments, their bewitchings, they reshape the dynamics of power, labor, and desire, becoming by implication condensations of petro-capitalism’s widening chasm between the haves and the never-will-haves. This otherworlding of American technological practices reaches its apogee in a scene where Munif conveys how geological and spiritual substrates interpenetrate: The diabolical Americans, who had come looking for water, why did they continually dig into the earth, never stopping but never taking anything out? The water from the wadi, from Sabha and from the many wells they dug was pumped back into a hole in the ground—why wasn’t it given to people? Did the ground hold such ghastly hordes of thirsty jinn, whose screams day and night could be heard only by the foreigners, who had come to quench their thirst? Were the jinn burning in the depths of the earth, and were the Americans pumping the water down to extinguish the ﬂames? Was there another world underground, with gardens, trees and men, all clamoring for water? This scene of mistranslation doubles as a scene of make-believe. Flummoxed by the foreigners’ failure to respect water’s insuperable value, the oasis dwellers read the ceaseless pumping as a possibly merciful act that quenches invisible, insatiable spiritual need. Incredible technological ritual is thereby folded back into the circle of belief. The locals explain away ecological insanity and ethical insensitivity—the Americans’ unproductive pumping fetish and their inhumane proﬂigacy—by speculating that the foreigners are attuned not to water but to some alternate universe below. Only the Americans can hear, as it were, the clamorous substrate, the notes from underground. This scene offers up, then, mistranslation as prescience: before the locals are let in on the underlying oil script, their speculations establish an ominous aura of geological-demonic suffering that foreshadows the traducing of the oasis, when the thirsty cries of gardens, trees and humans—an entire life world—will become inaudible, buried beneath petro-capitalism’s crescendo din. The Americans themselves are engaged in elaborate acts of translation. The ﬁrst technology that signiﬁes their arrival is the technology of writing, which becomes integral to their incremental appropriation of the wadi and becomes one of their distinguishing rituals. Each day the Americans wander the area, staring at, probing, and measuring the earth; at dusk, they retreat to their tents and stare with equal intent at paper, writing furiously. They bring in boxes of sand and write inscrutable things on them. From the outset, the wadi’s denizens perceive this peculiar crepuscular ritual as sinister, most likely a kind of witchcraft. What are they writing? For whom? What does it signify? Why does it happen when the light fades? We can read these scenes as intimating the twilight of the oasis itself: the writing at day’s end is covertly violent, masking its nature and intent, an act that sets in motion an escalating series of overtly violent acts. The power that a geological survey embodies may, of course, be used for positive or destructive ends. But here the implication is that in being written up, the place (and all the life forms that depend on it) is being written off. The prospectors’ writing may be petro-capitalism’s ﬁrst act of protoviolence, but it does not constitute a ﬁ rst mapping of the wadi; rather we can read their industrious writing as superimposing an “ofﬁcial landscape” onto a “vernacular landscape.” And thus the Americans will soon designate three oil camps outside Harran H, H, and H: the stark, affectless numerical counting, posing as rationality, discounts and overwrites the existing place names and the histories that animate them. If in his own life Munif turned to writing as a technology of resistance, in Cities he dramatizes a less honorable tradition of writing as imperial technology of camouﬂaged intent—particularly as wielded against predominantly illiterate ecosystem peoples. One notes, more broadly, that this dimension to the politics of writing—writing as scripted obliteration—remains pivotal to the struggles that animate environmental justice movements around the world; central, too, to the author-activists who have written back against the tendency to inscribe whole socioecological communities as superﬂuous, as primitive obstacles to development, or as nonexistent. This pattern of writing off—and writing back—extends to realms far beyond Munif ’s novels or the Persian Gulf. First the writer-geologists arrive, then the bulldozers and earthmovers as, step by step, the promise of wealth morphs into a heavily policed, militarized, imperially entangled, resource-cursed authoritarian state. The wadi’s uprooted Bedouin soon ﬁnd themselves at the violent end of another institutional novelty: a police force, instructed to beat to death if necessary anyone who refuses to abandon their oil-rich oases. Next, the people are moved to the coastal reﬁnery town, their camels are taken away, and a prison is created in which nomads can be jailed for, among other things, the ironic crime of vagrancy. In the sequel to Cities, The Trench, Munif tracks the sophisticated repressive technologies put in place to defend the collaborative interests of indigenous oil sheiks and the foreign oil barons. By now, with help from the CIA, the paranoid, proﬂigate ruler of America’s newly “postcolonial” oil colony has set up a surveillance culture, which he boasts, “can hear ants crawling in the dark.” If the ﬁrst two volumes of Cities describe an arc—from the coming of the writer-geologists, through the razing of the oasis, to the internal migrations to the company boomtown, to the petro-despotic carceral state—that arc should be understood as the passage from survey to surveillance. Among the procession of repressive technologies deployed to secure the surveillance society, writing returns to play a second role in the remaking of state and subjectivity. At the oasis, the Americans had asked few questions; what fascinated them—what demanded writing up—was the earth below, not the people above. But the Bedouins relocated to the urban wilderness of the company town ﬁnd that the Americans have now turned into big-time questioners: after long interrogations each worker is inscribed into the system, shadowed by a paper trail identity. The bewitchments of writing now include the signature and the identity card: writing has become fundamental to petro-modernity’s control of labor and to the administration of difference enforced by a surveillance-cum-carceral culture. These circumstances in which, far from being a mightier alternative to the sword, the pen becomes a sword supplement, are consistent with dissident Israeli architect Eyal Weizman’s observation that territorial domination starts not with bulldozers and tanks but with the notes and sketches amassed by architects and by town planners. Weizman portrays these written plans as a ﬁ rst move toward a “politics of verticality” whereby, as John Berger notes, “the defeated even when ‘at home’ are being literally overseen and undermined.” This formulation is particularly resonant when applied to the resource curse: Munif’s ﬁrst volume portrays a community profoundly undermined in the most literal sense, and his second portrays a displaced, urbanizing community that becomes brutally overseen. This undermined-and-overseen dyad recurs across resource-cursed communities, in the Middle East and far beyond. The Future Eaters and the Fuel-Fed Fire When Europeans began to colonize Australia, some aborigines dubbed these unfathomable strangers “the future eaters”: the newcomers consumed without replacing, devouring the future at a speed bereft of foresight, hollowing out time by living as if the desert were a place of inﬁnite, untended provision. This image of resource depletion as self-devouring cultural practice resonates with Munif’s depiction of that other, far-off ﬁrst desert encounter between Bedouins and American oil prospectors: there and indeed across the span of his work, Munif writes against the cycles of heedless avarice that imaginatively and materially erode older ecologies of time. Again and again, he returns to interweave the themes of shortsighted political repression and environmental temporal compression. The future eating that accelerated during the “American” century was unevenly spread between centers of consumption and extraction, an unevenness that intensiﬁed inequities, fomented violence, and solidiﬁ ed structural repressions. Early in that century, Upton Sinclair, writing from California (an extraction frontier already mutating into a consumption epicenter) concluded his great hydrocarbon epic with an apocalyptic eruption over the costs exacted by “visions of unearned wealth.” Such visions were widening the breach between America’s oil-impoverished classes and the nation’s oil-enriched: Sinclair cast petroleum as a variety of religious experience that, in rending the earth, rent communities asunder. In so doing, he anticipated on an internal (though never wholly internal) American frontier a divisive dynamic that would soon replicate and mutate internationally, assuming its most exaggerated and politically costly forms in the Middle East. Yet productive as it is to read Sinclair’s Oil! and Munif’s Cities of Salt in epic tandem, what passed for development in those two societies could scarcely have been more remote in their social outcomes. By the mid-s, when Munif was completing Cities of Salt, California boasted the world’s sixth-largest economy; whatever imperial and corporate ties still bound it to the Gulf States, economically diverse California was structurally shielded from the resource curse. However, at that stage, after almost ﬁfty years of oil extraction, Saudi Arabia, which ranked twenty-ﬁrst in GDP, still ranked only sixty-fourth on the United Nations Human Development Index (a combined measure of democratic, educational, and health achievement and income distribution). That gap of forty-three places between Saudi Arabia’s GDP and its Human Development Index was exceeded only by three other nation-states, all so-called oil rich: Oman, United Arab Emirates, and Gabon. We can thus read Cities of Salt as an epic expose of the ﬁctions of sovereignty and development in societies squeezed between petroleum overlords above and the desirable subsoil below. In interview, however, Munif is at pains to point out that it is not modernity per se that he laments but rather the particular mangled form that it assumed in the Arabian peninsula. What he deplores is perhaps best captured by Michael Watts who (reﬂecting on the Niger delta) writes of petro-capitalism’s “geography of intolerance.” That geography becomes, in Munif’s work, inseparable from petro-capitalism’s omnivorous appetite for time. In his ﬁ ction and nonﬁ ction alike, Munif expresses a deep perturbation at (in both senses of the phrase) futureless states. Having lived in ﬁve Middle Eastern countries, and having steeped himself in oil history for novels set in the Gulf States and Iran, Munif had a bird’s-eye view of the ways in which America’s cold-war strategizing converged with American support for tyrannies that helped secure stable access to petroleum. He foresaw how American policies—ranging from connivance through complicity to direct threats, assassinations, and the deliberate fomenting of unrest—increased the probability that uncontrollable blowback would ensue. Munif voiced outrage at the way, during the cold war’s ﬁnal decade, “the people behind fundamentalism’s current hard line were recruited as youths, then nurtured in Afghanistan, and ultimately sent on to Bosnia, all with the enthusiastic support of the United States and Saudi Arabia.” The jihad was not some atavistic, medieval eruption, but was in large measure the child of modernity in the form of the Soviet-Us. rivalry, of which control over petroleum reserves was a critical dimension. Munif once remarked that the double standards of Washington’s cold warriors left him nauseated: “They talked of democracy and human rights in the USSR, Eastern Europe and Cuba, but when they reached the Mediterranean coasts, they forgot about democracy. All they thought about was oil.” Five years before /, when a bomb blast killed nineteen American servicemen stationed in Saudi Arabia at Dhahran (the basis for Munif ’s ﬁctional Harran), Munif deplored the attack. He also sought to understand it, warning that America needed “to treat the causes of despair, not merely the symptoms. The United States, obsessed with oil fever and the need to control the oil states, has gone much too far in protecting regimes and individuals unworthy of protection.” Unless the United States backed those Muslims who sought to bring economic hope to the disaffected, unless it adopted a more even-handed approach to the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict, and unless it closed the military bases in Saudi Arabia that Muslims viewed as symbols of a collective humiliation, Munif feared worse was to come: more violent hijackings of Islam with even more catastrophic consequences. In essays and opinion pieces, Munif ﬂeshed out as argument the shortsighted cross-cultural dynamics he had brought to life as ﬁ ction in Cities of Salt. He insisted that America’s obsession with creating client regimes, not equal partners, would exacerbate the region’s instability, noting how the client-patron relationship “creates a psychological barrier between [the two sides], and makes it impossible for either to know what is going on in the minds and hearts of the other.” Munif’s concern with the long-term, destabilizing effects of the resultant cross-cultural opacity permeates Cities of Salt. More than a decade after he began that vast work, he felt greater apprehension than ever toward the future: “I speak as a novelist who follows events, and tries to understand them.In my book Cities of Salt, I wrote about the dangerous relationship between America and the countries of the Arabian Peninsula. Now it appears that what I imagined and expected—that the salt would dissolve in water—has begun.” In The Trench Munif turned to the Qur’an to ring the changes on his imagery of an apocalypse brought on by a self-immolating avarice. That volume’s title, Sabry Hafez observes, “alludes to the Qur’anic verse in which the inﬁdel ruler of Mecca casts believers into a pit of ﬁre: ‘Self-destroyed were the owners of the trench, of the fuel-fed ﬁre, when they sat by it, and were themselves the witnesses of what they did’ (LXXXV, –).” This new religion, which incinerates all before it, is the creed of petro-despotism, marked by uncontrollable rapacity, corruption, brutality, and hypocrisy. The motif of the fuel-fed ﬁre can thus be read as linking conspicuous consumption with its invisible twin, the inconspicuous consumption of irreplaceable oil time as, without hindsight or foresight, the petro-despotic state plunges headlong into the pit of collective self-destruction. Munif was angered by the lost ground of the Gulf States—the geological, historical, and political lost ground. He was well aware that the energy wars are time wars as well; the temporal debt that the Gulf States had incurred pained him—how they had frittered away their resource wealth, betraying both past and future generations. His own exile—his inhabited impermanence—surely quickened his responsiveness to the soaring and plummeting of historical fortunes, to the unstable, ﬂ eeting riches of the petroleum age, an age whose bounty he saw squandered by a failure to provide—at a national, regional, and planetary level—for its own provisionality. The ofﬁcial, sanitized histories disseminated by the Persian Gulf’s rulers and their imperial oil partners were rife with bromides and selective amnesia. Both parties made a big public relations push to distance themselves from any suggestion of imperialism. The most peculiar instance of this push is Wallace Stegner’s Discovery! The Search for Arabian Oil, commissioned by the Arabian American Oil Company in  as part of an effort to counter Nasserite denunciations of the House of Saud for capitulating to imperialism and betraying pan-Arabism. Stegner’s book, after a sixteen-year delay, was eventually published in the company magazine, Aramco World, in fourteen installments. Stegner, in the unfamiliar position of writer-forhire, nonetheless blithely reads Aramco’s history in Saudi Arabia as a mostly benign extension of America’s own mostly benign frontier development, an extension marked by a “spirit of goodwill and generosity toward the Saudi Arabs as people.” At pains to distance his paymasters from any intimation of imperial malpractice, Stegner underscores the company’s “frequent altruism,” its concern with “the total well-being of its employees, both American and Arab,” and how, unlike the British, the Americans refused to retreat into “aloof enclaves.” Munif’s interpretation of this history is closer to that of the “hostile propagandists” whom Stegner accused of maligning the well-intentioned, uplifting role that American companies had played in the region. Munif profoundly mistrusted the whitewashed corporate and petro-despotic grand narratives of progress: as a postcolonial novelist writing in imperial times, he recognized, at least implicitly, that failures in the forms of memory are inseparable from failures of political foresight. Looking back on the myopic cities of the Arabian Penisula, he viewed them as relics-in-the-making, as fossils from a ﬂeeting past. “The tragedy,” he declared, is not in our having the oil, but in the way we use the wealth it has created and in the future awaiting us after it has run out. Trees were cut down, people uprooted from their land, the earth dug up and oil ﬁnally pumped out only to turn people into a crowd of open mouths waiting for charity or a crowd or arms ﬁghting over a piece of bread and building an illusory future. In developed countries like Britain or Norway, the oil ‘whim’brings a new strength to the community, but in underdeveloped countriesoil becomes a damnation: a ceiling that screens the future from view. In twenty or thirty years’ time we shall discover that oil has been a real tragedy for the Arabs, and these giant cities built in the desert will ﬁnd no one to live in them and their hundreds of thousands of inhabitants will have to begin again their quest for the unknown. Oil could have been a road to the futurebut what actually happened is nothing like that. As a result we shall again have to face a sense of loss and estrangement, this time in complete poverty. Munif’s vision of imminent catastrophe viewed retrospectively as ruin makes him read, at times, like a Benjaminian Angel of Progress for the Petroleum Century: blown backwards into a post-oil future he watches the debris of progress pile up before his eyes. Munif ranks as one of the most mercilessly visionary writers to have engaged imaginatively with the politics of sustainability in its local, regional, transnational and transhistorical dimensions. His obsession with time’s tyrannies is more than metaphoric: his work returns, again and again, to the deathly dance between regional petro-despots and imperial petro-capitalists, both quickstepping with eyes determinedly averted from the sorrows of resource ﬁnitude. If Munif stands out as an epic chronicler of epic excess, beneath his satires runs an anxiety and a rage at the cultures of petro-amnesia that have erected cities of salt on a vast but delusory wealth, equally shallow in its social distribution and in its vision of inhabitable time. For although Cities of Salt spans well over a century, Munif is at heart a chronicler of violent temporal compression. The quintet follows the short road—but the great distance—traversed by Bedouin society as the engines of petro-capitalism propel it at speed through a wilderness of inequity toward a post-petroleum frontier that beggars the imagination. “Cities of Salt,” Munif once explained, “means cities that offer no sustainable existence. When the waters come in, the ﬁrst waves will dissolve the salt and reduce these great glass cities to dust. In antiquity, as you know, many cities simply disappeared. It is possible to foresee the downfall of cities that are inhuman. With no means of livelihood they won’t survive.” Munif directs his anger at the Arab States’ failure to shore up their future by diversifying their economies; by investing petroleum revenues in infrastructure; and critically, by cultivating a social democratic ethos, replete with a dynamic, resourceful civil society that would better prepare them for an oil-less tomorrow. Yet his choice of apocalyptic idiom—“when the waters come in”—beﬁts an age that is facing those twinned calamities of squandered time: oil’s receding tides and the advancing tides of climate change, sped on by our brief, rapacious age of hydrocarbon extraction and combustion.  Pipedreams Ken Saro-Wiwa, Environmental Justice, and Micro-minority Rights Shell operations still impossible unless ruthless military operations are undertaken for smooth economic activities to commence. —Nigerian government memo, December, Pity the land that needs heroes. —Bertolt Brecht Ken Saro-Wiwa squints at us from the cover of his Nigerian detention diary, the posthumous A Month and a Day. His moustache looks precise and trim; his eyes are alight; a gash scrawls across his temple. But it is his pipe that governs the picture. It is an intellectual’s accessory, a good pipe to suck and clench, to spew from and lecture with. Saro-Wiwa had expected tobacco to kill him: “I know that I am a mortuary candidate. But I intend to head for the mortuary with my pipe smoking.” In the end, it was the other pipes that got him, the Shell and Chevron pipes that poured poison into the land, streams, and bodies of Saro-Wiwa’s Ogoni people, provoking him to take up the life of protest that was to be his triumph and his undoing. Saro-Wiwa believed to the last that his writing would return to haunt his tormentors. Shortly before his execution in the Nigerian coastal city of Port Harcourt on trumped-up charges of murder, he declared: “The men who ordained and supervised this show of shame, this tragic charade, are frightened by the word, the power of ideas, the power of the pen.They are so scared of the word that they do not read. And that will be their funeral.” Saro-Wiwa’s conviction that the pen is mightier than the goon squad may well sound, to European and North American ears, like an echo from another age. But across much of Africa the certainty persists that writing can make things happen. [To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.] Figure  Cartoon protesting Ken Saro-Wiwa’s execution. Reproduced by permission of the artist, JR Swanson; and Chris Carlsson, via Processed World magazine. In one of his ﬁnal letters from detention, Saro-Wiwa assured his friend, the novelist William Boyd: “There’s no doubt that my idea will succeed in time, but I’ll have to bear the pain of the moment.the most important thing for me is that I’ve used my talents as a writer to enable the Ogoni people to confront their tormentors. I was not able to do it as a politician or a businessman. My writing did it.I think I have the moral victory.” Elsewhere, he prayed that his work would have as visceral an impact as Andre Gide’s  journal, Voyage au Congo, which prompted an outcry against Belgian atrocities, helping secure their cessation. Saro-Wiwa saw himself as part of that testimonial tradition, a witness to what he called the “recolonization” of Ogoniland by the joint forces of the oil companies and the Abacha regime. Together the corporations and the regime had transformed the Niger Delta into a Bermuda triangle for human rights. Saro-Wiwa wrote as a member of what I would call a micro-minority: he was one of,Ogoni in a nation of some  million, composed of nearly  ethnic groups. He produced tireless testaments to the devastation of his culture by the oil-driven avarice of vast forces beyond its control. He recognized, however, that the justice of a cause—particularly an African cause—is no reason to believe that it will gain the international attention it merits. As a writer and campaigner, he saw the strategic necessity of analogizing, of turning what he called the “deadly ecological war against the Ogoni” into a struggle emblematic of our times. His proliﬁ c writings thus lay the ground for a broader estimation of the global cost, above all to micro-minorities, of the ongoing romance between unanswerable corporations and unspeakable regimes. Micro-Minorities and the Delta of Death The problem of competitive ethnicity is widespread in Africa, but it is particularly acute in Nigeria. The roots of the problem derive from the British invention of Nigeria in. The British historian Lord Malcolm Hailey once described Nigeria as “the most artiﬁcial of the many administrative units created in the course of European occupation of Africa.” When Nigeria gained independence in,it kept its improbable borders with the result that almost  ethnic groups were clustered under the umbrella of one nation-state. For most of the ﬁve decades since independence, this formidably diverse society has suffered under military rule. Unelected ofﬁ cials from the three largest ethnic groups—the Yoruba, the Igbo, and the Hausa-Fulani—have totally dominated national politics. For Nigeria,  had the makings of an auspicious year. Independence was on the horizon; Chinua Achebe’s classic novel Things Fall Apart appeared, auguring great things—since realized—for the nation’s literary future; and on February, the ﬁrst tanker bearing Nigerian crude for export departed from Port Harcourt, destined for the Shell reﬁnery at the mouth of the Thames. What could and should have been for the Niger Delta’s oil minorities the beginnings of great promise augured instead a poisonous future. Who could have dreamed in  that four decades and $ billion of oil revenues later, some  million Nigerians would be surviving on less than a dollar a day? And that Nigeria would rank below Haiti and Congo on the United Nations Human Development Index, a composite gauge of life expectancy, education, and income? Even those ﬁgures don’t capture the plight of the Ogoni and the delta’s forty other oil micro-minorities: their environment has become so despoiled that supplementing that daily dollar with untainted crops and ﬁsh has become untenable. The Ogoni constitute approximately. percent of the Nigerian population. Thus, like the other micro-minorities who dwell in this delta the size of England, the Ogoni lack the political leverage and constitutional protections to lay claim to the wealth that has been stripped from their land. Nigeria’s independence initially promised a measure of economic justice for micro-minorities: the  constitution required that the government return  percent of any mining revenues to the region of extraction. But instead of the  percent constitutionally due to them, the Ogoni have been awarded a mere. percent, and in effect not even that. As a rule of thumb, the greater a nation’s reliance on a single product for its economic survival, the higher the chances that that society is riddled with corruption and afﬂicted by profoundly skewed income distribution. Nigeria’s dependence on oil is absolute: it constitutes  percent of Nigeria’s export revenue and generates  percent of government income. Thus Nigerian oil (of which the United States buys  percent) has readily become a precondition of and a byword for militarization. The petro-state has given rise, moreover, to a society in which  percent of oil wealth goes to a mere  percent of the populace, almost none of whom belong to the micro-minorities who inhabit, ingest, and inhale the ecological devastation. Shell is by far the largest foreign stakeholder in the Nigerian economy, owning  percent of the oil industry. Its joint venture partner in the petroleum business during Nigeria’s most draconian years was the Abacha regime. Yet Shell representatives have repeatedly declared that they exercise no inﬂuence over Nigeria’s rulers; Europe’s largest oil corporation has thereby ducked behind the brutalities of its militaristic ﬁnancial partners. Such an arrangement means that Shell and other foreign oil corporations can maintain their desired technological presence while, under cover of deference for national sovereignty, they continue to act as ethical absentees. This arrangement has also enabled Shell to ignore appeals by the Ogoni, the Ijaw, the Ikwerre and other neighboring micro-minorities for a share of oil revenues, a measure of environmental self-determination, and economic redress for their devastated environment. For Shell, Chevron, and the other oil majors operating in the delta, these are internal, Nigerian matters that belong to a sovereign realm inaccessible to corporate inﬂuence. But the record suggests otherwise: Chevron, for example, has acknowledged transporting Nigerian forces to quell uprisings in the oil camps of Rivers State. Shell has imported arms for the Nigerian police, paid retainers to Nigerian military personnel, and made boats and helicopters available to them in assaults against protestors. This is all integral to what one former Shell scientist has dubbed “the militarization of commerce”—an apt designation, if ever there was one, of resource extraction procedures under neoliberalism across the global South. By the time Saro-Wiwa was executed, the Nigerian military and Mobile Police force had killed,Ogoni through direct murder and the burning of villages. Ogoni air had been fouled by the ﬂaring of natural gas, their croplands scarred by oil spills, their drinking and ﬁshing waters poisoned. Although Shell was driven out of Ogoniland in,it simply moved on to other parts of Nigeria’s once lush delta of death. Meanwhile, the Shell legacy continues to seep into the environment and bodies of the local farming community that, unlike the international corporation, has nowhere else to go. One witness described the aftermath of an oilﬁeld explosion near the Ogoni village of Dere as an ocean of crude oil moving swiftly like a great river in ﬂ ood, successfully swallowing up anything that comes its way. Cassava farms, yams, palms, streams, and animals for miles on end. There is no pipeborne water and yet the streams, the only source of drinking water are coated with oil. You cannot collect a bucket of rain water for the roofs, trees and grass are all covered with oil.Men and women forced by hunger have to dive deep in oil to uproot already rotten yams and cassava. In the words of a second witness: “We can no longer breathe natural oxygen; rather we inhale lethal and ghastly gases. Our water can no longer be drunk unless one wants to test the effect of crude oil on the body.” The ﬂ aring of vast volumes of gas meant that villagers spent their nights beneath an arti.ﬁ cial sun: “The people were used to having  hours of day and  hours of night. But now their position is worse than that of the Eskimos in the North Pole. For while nature gave the Eskimos six months of daylight followed by six months of night, Shell-BP has given the Dere people about ten years of continuous daylight.” Subsistence farming and ﬁshing are the mainstays of these delta communities, yet they have received no compensation for the devastation of resources on which they utterly depend. The half million Ogoni retain nominal ownership of most of their densely populated territory. But since oil extraction began over sixty years ago, they have suffered massive subterranean dispossession. Shell, Chevron, and successive Nigerian regimes have siphoned $ billion worth of oil from beneath Ogoni earth. Yet the locals still ﬁnd themselves lacking a hospital, electricity, piped water, basic roads, housing, and schools. The community has found itself, in the fullest sense of the word, utterly undermined. Neocolonialism and Instrumental Aesthetics Faced with the neocolonial politics of mineral rights in the Niger Delta, Saro-Wiwa continued to believe that written testimony, backed by activism, could make a difference. Like many African authors before him, he recognized that in a society with frail democratic forces and a thin intellectual elite, interventionist writing required versatility and cunning. His life as a public intellectual was distinguished by his astute sense of strategy. Saro-Wiwa was alert to shifts in audience and occasion, locally and internationally; he would adjust his register and focus accordingly. He produced over twenty books across an ambitious spread of genres: novels, plays, short stories, children’s tales, poetry, histories, political tracts, diaries, satires, and newspaper columns. Sozaboy: A Novel in Rotten English, a witty and wrenching book about life in the Nigerian Civil War, is an iconoclastic work in patois, daring and brimful of ﬁne writing. But across Anglophone West Africa, Saro-Wiwa achieved his greatest renown as the creator of the TV comedy hit Basi and Company:  million Nigerians tuned into it during prime time on Wednesdays. Saro-Wiwa wrote  episodes of Basi, a robust satire with a moralistic edge. The series satirizes the street scammers and wide-boys who are such a feature of the Lagos life Saro-Wiwa loved and loathed. (“Living in Lagos,” Saro-Wiwa wrote, “is an invention in itself and no one, I repeat, no one who lives in it can fail to be touched by its phoniness.”) But after the death of one of his sons in,Saro-Wiwa cut back on his TV and literary activities. He single-mindedly devoted himself to the Ogoni cause, becoming the chronicler of his people’s genocide and, ﬁnally, a death-row diarist. Saro-Wiwa’s generic versatility, his belief in an instrumental aesthetics, and his obsession with land rights place him in an established tradition of African writing. Yet there the similarities end. For in East and Southern Africa, such tendencies have been routinely associated with writers whose anticolonialism—or anti-neocolonialism—has been inseparable from their socialism. One thinks, for instance, of Ngugi wa Thiong’o’s Barrel of the Pen and Maﬁka Gwala’s essay “Writing as a Cultural Weapon” (which became the credo for a generation of South African writers). Saro-Wiwa, by contrast, cultivated a deeply international sensibility while standing outside any lineage of African socialism. He was the ﬁrst African writer to articulate the literature of commitment in expressly environmental terms: “[T]he environment is man’s ﬁrst right,” he wrote in a letter smuggled from a Nigerian jail. Yet as a successful owner of a small business—successful enough to send a son to Eton—he was never anticapitalist per se. He did, however, ﬁnd himself painfully well placed to protest one of the signal developments of the s and s: the consolidation and increasingly unregulated mobility of transnational corporations. Five hundred corporations, Shell among them, now control  percent of global trade. As a micro-minority intellectual in an impoverished African country, Saro-Wiwa viewed deregulation as a synonym for corporate lawlessness of the kind that had ruined Ogoniland. But it is a testament to Saro-Wiwa’s savvy sense of strategy that his political protests went well beyond the devastation of his homeland. While passionately centered in that cause, he came to situate it in a wider, global frame. He began to criticize corrosive international tendencies: above all, how in third-world countries weakened by structural adjustment, unregulated transnational ﬁrms and the national soldiery are at liberty to vandalize the weakest minority communities. Saro-Wiwa appreciated the improbability of converting an injustice against a small African people into an international cause. His strategic response was to scour the wider political milieu for possible points of connection. In the preface to Genocide in Nigeria (), for instance, he takes heart from three contemporary developments: “[T]he end of the Cold War, the increasing attention being paid to the global environment, and the insistence of the European Community that minority rights be respected, albeit in the successor states to the Soviet Union and in Yugoslavia.” But, he worried, “It remains to be seen whether Europe and America will apply to Nigeria the same standards which they have applied to Eastern Europe.” His doubts have proved well founded. Unconventional War by Ecological Means A Month and a Day includes a record of Saro-Wiwa’s imaginative efforts to capitalize on these new forms of international attention. Initially, both human rights groups and ecological groups proved equally unreceptive to the Ogoni cause. An African intellectual claiming ethnocide by environmental means? Saro-Wiwa seemed, at ﬁrst, eccentric and unplaceable. At Boyd’s prompting, he decided to contact Greenpeace. They replied, quite simply, that they did not work in Africa. Amnesty International, for their part, said they could only take up the Ogoni cause if the military was killing people or detaining them without trial, a process that had yet to begin. Saro-Wiwa responded with frustration: “The Ogoni people were being killed all right, but in an unconventional way.” As he later elaborated: The Ogoni country has been completely destroyed by the search for oil.Oil blow-outs, spillages, oil slick and general [] pollution accompany the search for oil.Oil companies have ﬂared gas in Nigeria for the past thirty-three years causing acid rain.What used to be the bread basket of the delta has now become totally infertile. All one sees and feels around is death. Environmental degradation has been a lethal weapon in the war against the indigenous Ogoni people. Appeals to minority and environmental rights both gained ground in the s, but there was little precedent in Africa for their simultaneous invocation. Despite the early unresponsiveness of Greenpeace, Amnesty International, Friends of the Earth, and Survival International, Saro-Wiwa persisted in arguing that the Ogoni were victims of an “unconventional war” being prosecuted by ecological means. Undeterred, he sought to educate himself further through travel. An odyssey through the rupturing Soviet Union conﬁrmed his sense of a growing international context for the articulation of minority claims. A visit to Colorado gave him access to an environmental group that had successfully salvaged a wilderness from corporate and governmental assaults. These experiences persuaded Saro-Wiwa that his incipient Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP) would be well served by linking minority rights to environmental rights. Through a young Dutch lawyer, Michael van Walt van der Praag, long active in the Tibetan cause, Saro-Wiwa made contact with the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organizations. This gave him access to the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations, which he addressed in Geneva in. (That same year, another Ogoni leader, Chief Dr. H. Dappa-Biriye, spoke at the Rio Earth Summit on behalf of the delta peoples.) Saro-Wiwa discovered that “in virtually every nation-state there are several ‘Ogonis’—despairing and disappearing peoples suffering the yoke of political marginalization, economic strangulation or environmental degradation, or a combination of these.” The parallel tracks of Saro-Wiwa’s self-education had ﬁnally converged. From  onward, the combined appeal to minority and environmental rights became fundamental to the MOSOP campaign. Human rights and ecological groups that had once found the Ogoni campaign enigmatic now became its most adamant international supporters. Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch/Africa, International Pen, Abroad, and the Body Shop all rallied to the cause. These developments gave Saro-Wiwa’s campaign a resonance it had previously lacked and challenged stereotypes about environmental activists: that they are inevitably white, young, middle-class Europeans or Americans who can afford to hug trees because they have been spared more desperate battles. Saro-Wiwa’s campaign for environmental self-determination may well prove historically critical to the development of a broader image of ecological activism. Just as we witnessed how the sometimes rareﬁ ed concerns of middle-class white feminists in the s gave way in ensuing decades to a more internationally diverse array of feminisms, locally led and locally deﬁ ned, so too we are now seeing indigenous environmentalisms proliferate under pressure of local necessity. As the spectrum of what counts as environmental activism expands, it becomes harder to dismiss it as a sentimental or imperial discourse tied to European or North American interests. Nor does the case for this diversiﬁcation rest, any longer, solely on Amazonian or Indian examples. Saro-Wiwa understood that environmentalism needs to be reimagined through the experiences of the minorities who are barely visible on the global economic periphery, where transnationals in the extraction business—be it oil, mining, or timber—operate with maximum impunity. Environmental justice became for him an invaluable concept through which to focus the battle between subnational micro-ethnicities and transnational macroeconomic powers. As an Ogoni, suffering what he called Nigeria’s “monstrous domestic colonialism,” Saro-Wiwa was in no position to trust the nation-state as the unit of collective economic good. Instead, he advocated a measure of ethnic federalism in which environmental self-determination would be acknowledged as indispensable to cultural survivalafter the “judicial murder” of Saro-Wiwa and the eight other accused, public outrage tended to divide into those who primarily condemned the Abacha regime and those who condemned Shell. For Saro-Wiwa, however, the blame was indivisible. He consistently represented the Ogoni as casualties of joint occupying powers: the transnational oil corporations and a brutal, extortionate Nigerian regime. Shell, meanwhile, sought to put a positive gloss on this relationship, with public relations primers like “Nigeria and Shell: Partners in Progress.” But the regressive character of the relationship is more accurately portrayed by a leaked Nigerian government memo addressing protests in Ogoniland. Dated December, it reads: “Shell operations still impossible unless ruthless military operations are undertaken for smooth economic activities to commence.” This ruthless smoothing of Ogoniland was embarked on in a spirit of racism and ethnic hatred. Again, Saro-Wiwa resisted the temptation to reduce his people’s suffering to either term. Shell’s racism is manifest: in Africa, the company waives onshore drilling standards that it routinely upholds elsewhere. Indeed,  percent of all Shell oil spills worldwide have occurred in Nigeria. When operating in the Northern hemisphere—in the Shetlands, for instance—Shell pays lucrative rents to local councils; in the Niger Delta, village authorities receive no comparable compensation. A  World Bank report noted that  percent of the natural gas resulting from petroleum production in Nigeria was ﬂared (at temperatures of,degrees Celsius), while in Britain only. percent and in the United States a mere. percent was ﬂared. This toxic practice foreshortened the life expectancy of the delta peoples. Children, moreover, who had no access to electricity to read or learn by also had no experience of night, as they lived / beneath the blazing false sun of interminable ﬂares, as if in some seasonless equatorial rendition of an Arctic summer. In the mid-s, when ﬂaring from Nigeria’s oil ﬁelds was pumping  million tons of methane and  million tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere annually, it was argued by some that this was the single greatest contributor worldwide to climate change. (In this one regard at least, the oil corporations did not discriminate.) Given this backdrop, the irony was not lost on the Ogoni that Shell was winning awards in Europe for environmentally sensitive conduct—north-south greenwashing, par excellence. But Shell’s racial double standard would have been inoperable without brutal backing from a Nigerian regime whose record on minority rights verged on the ethnocidal. General Abacha’s dreaded Mobile Police force— which Nigerians dubbed the “Kill and Go Mob”—responded violently to peaceful protests by the Ogoni and their delta neighbors. After an anti-Shell rally in January  drew several hundred thousand Ogoni, the police razed twenty-seven villages. Two thousand Ogoni were killed and,displaced. Saro-Wiwa has likened the fate of the Ogoni during the oil rush to their fate during the Nigerian Civil War of,when a conﬂict erupted between the nation’s dominant ethnicities. This battle over oil territory left the Ogoni ﬂattened “like grass in the ﬁght of the elephants.” Ten percent of all Ogoni died in a war that was not of their making, a calamity that drove home for Saro-Wiwa the distinction between minority and extreme minority status. A micro-minority was powerless to inﬂuence national events, particularly in a society run on principles of kleptocratic militarism. The wealth that ﬂowed beneath Ogoniland was wealth in name only: historically, it brought poverty, injustice, and death, as outsiders stampeded for oil. A quarter century after the civil war, Saro-Wiwa’s despair about Nigeria continued to deepen because the nation’s rulers had “the hearts of stone and the brains of millipedes; because Shell is a multinational company with the ability to crush whomever it wishes; and because the petroleum resources of the Ogoni serve everyone’s greed.” The International Response The fact that the Ogoni have been casualties of racism and ethnic hatred may help, in a peculiar way, to explain the low-key American response to the executions. The outcry in Britain, South Africa, and France was far more vocal and sustained. In the British case, this is understandable: Shell is an Anglo-Dutch conglomerate, and British coverage of Africa has traditionally been stronger than America’s because of the colonial ties. (For similar reasons, the reverse is true of Latin American news.) But there was more to the American media’s relative indifference to the executions than that. In Us. political discourse, racial oppression and minority discrimination typically function as identical terms. This makes it difﬁcult for liberal or minority Americans to condemn in a single breath an African regime for oppressing its own minorities and a European corporation for racism against Africans. Randall Robinson, director of TransAfrica, the African-American foreign-policy lobbyists, met with a ruptured response to his appeal for Us. sanctions against Nigeria similar to those imposed on South Africa. Many African-American leaders, among them, Louis Farrakhan—who visited Lagos and gave the Abacha regime his blessing—argued that it was divisive to campaign against any African government. But Saro-Wiwa never enjoyed the luxury of such long-distance compunctions. He insisted that the Ogoni were joint casualties of a brutal European racism and an equally brutal African ethnocentrism. He never hesitated to make such controversial connections. As he wrote in his prison diary, skin colour is not strong enough to stop the oppression of one group by another. Sometimes it reinforces oppression because it makes it less obvious. White people oppressing blacks in South Africa draws instant condemnation because it is seen to be racism. But black upon black oppression merely makes people shrug and say, “Well, it’s their business, isn’t it?” Saro-Wiwa repeatedly called for international measures—like those that had helped end apartheid—against a Nigerian regime that he deemed equally heinous. The two countries rank as the powerhouses of the continent: South Africa boasts Africa’s largest economy and Nigeria the second largest, as well as being the continent’s most populous nation. At the time of Sarowiwa’s appeal for international intervention, the image of these two giants had undergone a sharp reversal. For over thirty years, Nigeria had stood as Africa’s leader in the antiapartheid campaign. But just as South Africa, under Mandela’s leadership, was ﬁnally moving beyond apartheid, so Nigeria was sinking to its antidemocratic nadir. By the time the ﬁfty-two Commonwealth nations met in Auckland, New Zealand, in November,South Africa and Nigeria’s standing had largely been reversed. South Africa was present at a Commonwealth gathering for the ﬁrst time in thirty-ﬁve years. And triumphantly so, in the magisterial form of Nelson Mandela. Previously the ritual object of Commonwealth condemnations, South Africa was now, by virtue of Mandela’s moral gravitas, the de facto commonwealth leader. Nigeria, by contrast, had become a potential new pariah. The Commonwealth, the United States, and the European Union were all goading Mandela to take the lead in Africa. Nigeria was to be his ﬁrst major foreign policy test. On arriving at the summit, Mandela voiced his opposition to isolating Nigeria, advocating quiet negotiations instead. The Nigerian regime responded, almost immediately, by hanging Saro-Wiwa and the Ogoni Eight. Mandela instantly became the target of outrage. Wole Soyinka charged him with appeasement, likening his “quiet diplomacy” toward the Nigerian junta to Reagan and Thatcher’s notorious policy of “constructive engagement” toward the apartheid regime. Professor Kole Omotoso, one of the swelling ranks of Nigerian exiles who had found refuge in South Africa, agreed: “Those who know my country know how irrational and illogical the military regime is. There wasn’t a chance that it would respond to what Mandela called ‘softly-softly.’” Saro-Wiwa’s lawyer protested angrily to Mandela, “Were quiet diplomacy pursued in South AfricaI doubt you would be alive today.” Mandela’s tragic misreading of the Abacha regime and the threat to Saro-Wiwa can best be understood in terms the ANC’s historical sentimentality toward Nigeria. Many of South Africa’s new political and cultural elite had found refuge in Nigeria in the s, when it was emerging as a bulwark against apartheid and colonialism. Those exiles included eminents like the academic and writer, Ezekiel Mphahlele, and the South African deputy president, Thabo Mbeki. It is no coincidence that Mbeki became South Africa’s chief negotiator in the country’s “softly-softly” response to the Abacha coup. He seemed to confuse South Africa’s historic debt (and his own personal one) to the Nigerian people with a debt to Nigeria’s rulers, even when they had deposed an elected government and enjoyed no popular mandate whatsoever. At the Commonwealth summit, Nigerian human rights activist Innocent Chukwuma stressed the wrongheadedness of this confusion. Calling for an international ban on Nigerian oil, Chukwuma pointed out, “The proceeds from oil revenue are going into private accounts. They don’t even get to the people.” In  alone, $ billion worth of oil went missing from government accounts. The South African failure to provide international leadership against Abacha also needs to be understood in terms of the ANC’s “fetish for compromise.” This ﬁxation had enabled Mandela to maneuver the ANC into power and to avert the civil war that just before the South African elections had begun to look menacingly imminent. But he misjudged the Nigerian political climate: Abacha was more ruthless than De Klerk, and Nigeria lacked the dense matrix of civic bodies, trade unions, and other democratic organizations that exerted pressure on the apartheid regime while Mandela negotiated a compromise. If Saro-Wiwa’s execution triggered a national political scandal for Mandela’s government, it also quickened the ﬂow of Nigerian exiles and refugees into South Africa. These included intellectuals, journalists, and democratic activists. In perhaps the surest sign of the about-face in Nigerian-South African relations, Johannesburg became a prominent outpost of the Lagos-based Democratic Alternative, of the Saro-Wiwa support campaign, and of the international boycott of Shell. Where ANC activists had once plotted against apartheid in Lagos and Kano, thirty years later, Nigerian democrats were mobilizing in Johannesburg for the overthrow of the Abacha regime. Thus the Ogoni “judicial murders” brought into focus the critical vulnerability of Africa’s micro-minorities, as well as the shifting prospects for democracy on the continent. Micro-Minorities and the Resource Curse Some years back, the Philippine government placed an ad in Fortune magazine that read: “To attract companies like yours, we have felled mountains, razed jungles, ﬁlled swamps, moved rivers, relocated townsall to make it easier for you and your business to do business here.” The Philippines is just one of a succession of poor nations to have wooed transnationals in a manner indissociably catastrophic for the environment and micro-minorities. This process has been most acutely damaging in the equatorial belt that girdles the earth’s midriff from Ecuador, Bolivia and Brazil; through Surinam and Guyana; on through Nigeria, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, and Congo; to the Philippines, Malaysian Borneo, Indonesia, and New Guinea. This belt contains a unique concentration of ethnic minorities for simple ecological reasons. Rich equatorial ecosystems encouraged the development of a higher concentration of self-sufﬁ cient cultural groups than was possible in less fertile regions. Today most of these ethnic groups exist as micro-minorities in undemocratic, often destitute nation-states that register in the global economy principally as sites for the unregulated extraction of oil, minerals, and timber. It is thus no coincidence that indigenous environmentalism has burgeoned most dramatically in this zone, as micro-minorities battle for the survival of their land-dependent subsistence cultures. The plunder and terror suffered by the Ogoni have been mirrored in other mineral-rich equatorial regions, West Papua, Ecuador, and Peru among them. West Papua has an even higher concentration of minorities than the Niger Delta. And, like the delta peoples, West Papuans have the curse of wealth—some of the world’s richest deposits of copper and gold—seaming beneath their land. They face a similar alliance between an occupying military power and an unscrupulous transnational corporation. The same Indonesian regime responsible for the third worst genocide of the twentieth century, in East Timor, colonized West Papua with a brutality that killed,indigenous people. Their accomplice in that endeavor was the Louisiana-based mining transnational Freeport McMoran. After the arrival of Freeport in,the indigenous people endured detention without trial, torture, forced resettlement, disappearances, the plunder of their mineral wealth, and the uncompensated degradation of their environment. Freeport’s private security ofﬁcers and the Indonesian military on occasion combined to shoot and kill unarmed indigenous protesters. In an alliance even more devastating than that between the Abacha regime and Shell, the Indonesian regime and Freeport pursued ethnocide as a condition of mandatory development. James Moffett, Freeport McMoran’s chairman, himself seemed confused as to whether such “progress” was a life-giving or death-dealing business. In Moffett’s proud words, “Freeport is thrusting a spear of development into the heart of West Papua.” In this deadly battle, the micro-minorities fought back in a language that melded new modes of environmental deﬁance with a more traditional reverence for the land. As one Amungme leader put it, “Freeport is digging out our mother’s brain. That is why we are resisting.” Some of these acts of environmental deﬁance have begun to take effect: for example, in the oil-rich Oriente Region of Ecuador, where Texaco devastated Indian territory in a manner similar to Shell’s despoliation of Ogoniland. Oriente drinking water, ﬁshing grounds, soil, and crops have all been polluted. According to the Rainforest Action Network, Texaco spilled  million gallons of crude oil in the Oriente, leaving a toxic legacy that has caused, as in Ogoniland, chronic health problems for the residents. Here again, the seepage of oil-contaminated waste resulted from the jettisoning of procedures that are standard for onshore drilling in the Northern hemisphere. The appeal of the Oriente and Ogoniland is precisely the prospect of proﬁts without interference or limits. As one petroleum geologist working in the Oriente put it: “I want to stamp on the ground hard enough to make that oil come out. I want to skip legalities, permits, red tape, and other obstacles. I want to go immediately and straight to what matters: getting that oil.” Ecuador’s Acci Ecolgica led a successful national boycott of Texaco and has helped drive the corporation from the region. In addition, a coalition of indigenous federations, mestizos, grassroots environmentalists, and human rights groups pursued an innovative avenue of redress, ﬁ ling a $. billion class action suit in New York against Texaco. The suit earned the support of Ecuador’s Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities, the country’s largest Indian organization. Following the Ecuadorian example, a group of Ogoni villagers decided to sue Shell for $ million for spillages that had robbed them of their livelihood. Joseph Conrad and Colonial Buccaneering Redux The ravaging of West New Guinea, the Oriente, and Ogoniland testiﬁ es to the growing inequity between subnational minorities and transnationals that have enjoyed enhanced mobility and experienced diminishing controls since neoliberalism’s ascent in the s. Third-world governments are often joint partners in the regional plunder or worse than useless at regulating transnationals that are more powerful than the states themselves. One result has been a reversion to concessionary economics in which forested or mineral-rich areas are sold for a song. It is in this context that Saro-Wiwa’s talk of recolonization and his invocation of Andre Gide’s Congo journal begin to sound eerily apposite. When Shell can pump out $ billion worth of oil and the trade-off for the locals is disease, dispossession, military occupation, massacres, and an end to self-sustaining ﬁshing and agriculture, the process seems more redolent of late nineteenth-century colonial buccaneering than it does of twenty-ﬁrst century international economics. But if the idea of the nation-state continues to lose any vestige of popular appeal through a failure to deliver local beneﬁts, and if rulers lack the will or the resources to command a national polity, the continent’s poorest countries will continue to fall prey to a twenty-ﬁrst-century version of nineteenth-century concessionary economics, unhampered by regulations or redress. The nation-state will become ever more marginal to deals negotiated between local chiefs and transnationals, an imbalance in bargaining power if ever there was one. A German diplomat recently foresaw as much: “In the twenty-ﬁrst century German ambassadors and CEOs heading for Africa may again be authorized to sign treaties of cooperation with whatever coastal kings or leaders are able to assert some sort of control over the interior.” Under such circumstances, the kleptocrats and soldiery in the nominal capital will still demand their palm greasing, while locally, the chiefs request their crude version of the same. Such practices are already widespread. During Abacha’s rule, for example, a group of foreign explorers arrived by ship at the head of a marshy river near the Niger Delta village of Sangama. They sought to establish a station there. After lengthy bartering with a local chief, they settled on his cut: he would receive £, sterling, twelve bottles of cognac, and twelve bottles of gin. But as the foreigners pushed deeper into the hinterland, they found villagers blocking their river route with a barricade of palm fronds and canoes. The explorers’ leader felt bewildered and betrayed. He reported, “There were about a hundred people ahead of us. If we’d pressed ahead we would have risked killing them. So we took a boat and went back to get Chief Jumbo.” More bargaining, more demands. Another £ changed hands, a further bottle of gin, an agreement to repair a building. The chief sacriﬁced a goat to the water gods; the barricade was lifted; the foreigners passed through. If they weren’t pulling an oil rig in tow, this could be have been an entry from Gide’s Congo journal or the opening scene of a lost Conrad novel. Over a century has passed since Conrad immortalized in ﬁ ction the unregulated plunder that he witnessed in the Congo. In a gesture of imaginative cynicism, he christened the worst of these plunderers the Eldorado Expedition. They were “sordid buccaneers: reckless without hardihood.To tear treasures out of the bowels of the land was their desire, with no more moral purpose at the back of it than there is in burglars breaking into a safe.” Over great swathes of Africa and much of the global South, Eldorado Expeditions are rising from the dead. They are still the self-declared standard-bearers of progress and are still tearing at the bowels of the earth. Today one ﬁnds in their motley ranks a mix of international and indigenous colonialists. Not least in Nigeria of which Saro-Wiwa once remarked in exasperation, “there is no such country. There is only organized brigandage.” We have witnessed in the past two decades the accelerated extraction of African minerals, oil, and timber in many of the continent’s least stable nations: Liberia, Gabon, Congo, Central African Republic, Nigeria, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sierra Leone, Mauritania, and Angola among them. (South African mining corporations, buoyed by their postapartheid legitimacy, have come to compete in this terrain against European, American, Australian, Canadian, Chinese, and Brazilian outﬁts.) However, in most of these shaky African nations, concessionary economics, kleptocratic rule, structural adjustment, and corporate deregulation mean that irreplaceable minerals and forests are being lost for little national gain and at considerable local ruin. We are seeing a repartitioning of Africa into what French colonialists used to call l’Afrique utile and l’Afrique inutile: this time “capital ‘hops’ over ‘unusable Africa,’ alighting only in mineral-rich enclaves that are starkly disconnected from their national societies.” It is in this climate that Saro-Wiwa’s campaign against the destruction of micro-minorities through the devastation of their environment has proven to be a harbinger of a much broader discontent. He seemed to intuit as much at his tribunal, as he looked back on his life with an otherworldly eye: “I will tell you this, I may be dead, but my ideas will surely not die.” The Gospel cadences to Saro-Wiwa’s prophecy are consistent with the Passion play the Nigerian junta inadvertently helped create. Saro-Wiwa was no messiah. He was a courageous man who stood outside the conventions of corruption but who could also be testy, inﬂexible, self-aggrandizing, and subject to overweening ambition. The junta took this very mortal and internationally obscure activist, gave him a stage trial, and turned him through execution into a martyr. They thus ampliﬁed his cause and—as happens with martyrs—simpliﬁed it in his favor. (“Living people grow old but martyrs grow younger,” the Palestinian poet Mourid Barghouti once observed.) Saro-Wiwa instantly became larger and longer than life. The word ﬂ ashed around Lagos and Port Harcourt that he had refused to die, that it had taken ﬁve hangings to kill him. As a ﬁnal precaution against his posthumous revenge, the regime stationed armed guards at the cemetery. They had orders to shoot anyone seen approaching the grave to pay homage or claim relics. Saro-Wiwa understood far better than his adversaries that you can’t crucify ideas, that there are some things which cannot be resolved by a show of force. Abacha and his sidekicks were exasperated by the unruliness of language, by its refusal to submit to military control. In countries like Nigeria where ofﬁ cial brutality and paranoia feed off each other, unofﬁ cial writing begins to assume the status of latent insult. Thus journalists, writers, and intellectuals are singled out for harassment, detention, torture, and execution often as much for what they represent as for anything they say. But Africa’s muscle men who seek to shackle language and criminalize imaginings only ﬂatter writers with their fears. While Abacha was naïve enough to believe that murdering Saro-Wiwa would silence him, another African autocrat, Kenyan president Daniel arap Moi, was simultaneously seeking to stamp out subversive fantasy. He had a journalist arrested for “the crime of imagining the death of the president.” This was surely the high-water mark for the dictatorial tendency to equate fantasy with political treason. Abacha clearly had no conception of the cost of creating a martyred writer, an image with considerable pulling power in the media—doubly so after the fatwa against Salman Rushdie. The threat of censorship typically raises the hackles of journalists and writers because they are professionally invested in freedom of speech. From this viewpoint, the execution of a writer on false charges is more than just another human injustice; it also becomes, as Harold Pinter observed, “the most brutal form of censorship.” It was predictable, therefore, that the image of Saro-Wiwa as writer-martyr would provoke intense journalistic outrage as well as the most vocal literary protest since the Rushdie affair. Pinter, Soyinka, Boyd, Chinua Achebe, Ben Okri, Fay Weldon, and Arthur Miller were just a few of the writers who spoke out publicly against Abacha and Shell. So in death Saro-Wiwa extended—surely, beyond his imaginings—the remarkable coalition of international interests he had begun to forge while alive, an alliance that brought together environmentalists, minority rights advocates, antiracists, opponents of corporate deregulation, and defenders of free speech. Whether his principles ultimately prevail will depend as much on the future of this coalition as on the timeliness of the ideas themselves. Otherwise, the pipe-pufﬁng activist, with his tenacious faith in democracy, nonviolence, and the power of the pen, will lose yet further ground to the ﬁgure (in Michael Watts’s image) of “the masked militant armed with the ubiquitous Kaloshnikov, the typewriter of the illiterate.” Forms of Inheritance, the Inheritance of Loss At Saro-Wiwa’s funeral, his eldest son, Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr., followed his father’s express instructions, placing two copies of Ken Sr.’s books in the cofﬁn alongside his favorite pipe. As the cofﬁn was lowered into the tomb, the attendant crowd surged forward and, for a moment, Saro-Wiwa Jr. felt certain he would be swept into his father’s grave. The incident speaks powerfully to the son’s lifelong fear of the all-devouring cause, the cause that had swallowed his father and threatened to swallow the next generation as well. More broadly, the incident speaks to the risks and quandaries that attend the martyr-focused cause as a political ﬁgurehead’s pragmatic leadership enters the realm of mythic potency through the manner of his death. The immortal corpse, the one true body of the cause, can become a powerful political asset but also stand dauntingly in the path of those who wish to take the struggle forward in new ways, for new times. Rival claimants—all anonymous by comparison—will clash, sometimes violently, over who has the right, by birth or principle, to take up the hero’s mantle. For those who follow, after martyrdom, what next? This question looms over the life and writings of Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr., his father’s anointed but initially reluctant legatee. Saro-Wiwa Jr.’s memoir, In the Shadow of a Saint, which closes with that image of the son teetering above his father’s gaping grave, stages a searching engagement with the forms of inheritance. This often-anguished, internally riven book allows us to open up vexing questions, at once political and aesthetic, about activist nonﬁ ction: questions about individual creativity and movement answerability, about originality and reiteration, about self-revelation and self-concealment. Read in tandem, A Month and a Day and In the Shadow of a Saint offer contrasting routes into the maze of nonﬁction forms that activist-writers can draw on in pursuit of their political and literary ends. A Month and a Day is an unruly, polyvocal work, a nonﬁ ctional collage, in which Saro-Wiwa tacks back and forth among a raft of genres: diary, memoir, journal, manifesto, advocacy journalism, ethnography, and satire, throwing in for good measure some transcribed speeches and a bill of rights. The book’s disorderly syncretism is partly circumstantial: most of it was spliced together under the stresses of Saro-Wiwa’s conﬁnement in a Port Harcourt prison. Yet one senses in the irreverent, breathless bricolage something tactical as well, the propulsive urgency of colliding forms as Saro-Wiwa strives to ﬁt into a single book an ill-ﬁtting set of causes by binding together, in unprecedented ways, an African commitment to environmental and human rights, to micro-minority justice, and to exposing the slow violence of what he judges to be attritional ecological genocide. The result is a book without a clear narrative itinerary or stable voice, structurally diffuse yet inventively afﬁliative and unwavering in its political energy. Despite the word “diary” in the subtitle, A Month and a Day is at best a ﬁtfully personal book; the private Saro-Wiwa disappears for long stretches, and when he reappears he does so primarily as an outsize public persona in a way that renders him opaque. We can read his son’s memoir, in part, as a questing, ambiguous protest against his father’s vanishing acts—as a parent and as a writer. Saro-Wiwa Jr. uses the memoir’s intimate potential to push back against a certain self-aggrandizing impersonality that comes with the heroizing territory of the cause. As he wrestles with his political and familial inheritance, Saro-Wiwa Jr. strives to humanize his remote, complex father—to put mortal ﬂesh on his immortality—without diminishing what he stood for. This requires a layered exhumation, as the son seeks to unearth the father whom he’d lost in life to a higher cause and then lost a second time to “judicial murder” and then a third time, after death, to sainthood. In exhuming his father Saro-Wiwa Jr. must also exhume himself from beneath the weight of the familial, inherited cause so that ultimately he can embrace the commitments that his father had chosen for him, but on his own terms. That embrace is fraught with ambivalence at ﬁrst because, while growing up, his chief competitor for his father’s scarce time and affection was that most voracious rival sibling, the Ogoni cause itself. Saro-Wiwa Jr.’s decision to become an écriture engagée himself compounded his predicament. What he had long feared was the already-scripted life, in which he was destined from birth to be his insurrectionary father’s compliant shadow act, a fear intensiﬁed by his father’s afterlife as the martyred essence of the noble, untouchable cause. “I grew up in a political house, and it had turned me off politics. When many of my friends were looking for a political cause because they were tired of living uncomplicated lives, I just wanted an uncomplicated life because I was tired of living a political cause.” It was his father’s detention that propelled the son—who had spent most of his life in England and Canada—into politics and political writing. Saro-Wiwa Jr. walks a line between intransigence and deference as he creates a testament that is, in a double sense, a resistance memoir: he revolts against the emotional costs imposed on a household where political revolt was the iron-ﬁsted orthodoxy, while also carrying forward the cause that shaped his father’s life and sealed his fate. If it is originality that he prizes as a writer, Saro-Wiwa Jr. the activist must ﬁrst defer such ambitions, as he recapitulates the arc of his father’s—and his people’s—grievances, citing amply from his father’s work. But the memoir takes a decidedly individual turn as he travels to meet the children of mythic freedom ﬁghters—some martyred, some still monumentally alive—like Nelson Mandela, Steve Biko, and Aung San Suu Kyi. He shares, with the small band of saints’ children, the strange struggle to reconcile a parent’s ethical stature as the hallowed face of justice with the absences, the aloofness, the familial dysfunction, and to ﬁnd in all of that some measure of resistant loyalty. In looping back to embrace his father’s commitment to environmental justice and micro-minority rights, Saro-Wiwa Jr. draws strength from literary precedent as well: while campaigning for his father’s release, he carries with him Nadine Gordimer’s great novel, Burger’s Daughter, which charts the quest, by an antiapartheid hero’s daughter, to ﬁnd a way of circumventing the abstracted icon of her father while pursuing her own half-chosen, half-inherited commitment to the justice of his cause. In his pursuit of environmental justice, Saro-Wiwa Jr. sought to do an end run around the dysfunctional Nigerian state. He took up the cause as writer and speaker on the international human rights circuit but also, critically, as a lead plaintiff in a fourteen-year-long case against Shell for complicity in his father’s execution and for paying soldiers who had committed human rights abuses in Ogoniland. On June, days before the trial was due to begin in New York, Shell settled out of court, agreeing to pay $. million, mostly into a trust fund for the Ogoni people. The plaintiffs had ﬁled under the Alien Tort Claims Act of,which the Supreme Court ruled in  could be used to try in American courts foreigners accused of crimes against humanity overseas. There is a satisfying symmetry to learning that the Alien Tort Claims Act was originally introduced in the eighteenth century to combat piracy, given the piratical practices of the Shell-Abacha partnership under a system that Saro-Wiwa once condemned as “organized brigandage.” Saro-Wiwa Jr. saw the settlement as a victory that he believed would have pleased his father: “[F]rom a legal perspective, this historic case means that corporations will have to be much more careful.” However, the legacy of the case may be more complicated than that. Most large corporations sued under the Alien Tort Claims Act have, like Shell (and like the oil giant Unocal, charged with using slave labor to build a pipeline across Burma in the s) settled out of court, leaving no clear trail of legal precedent. Moreover, when MOSOP activists ejected Shell from Ogoniland in the s, the company left without conducting any cleanup and continued to operate with environmental impunity in the wider, increasingly volatile delta area. The costs of environmental reparation for the slow violence that has permeated the delta and its inhabitants are incalculable: the World Wildlife Fund has put out a ﬁgure of $ billion, but really there’s no telling. Before the settlement, Ledum Mittee, who assumed the leadership of Saro-Wiwa’s MOSOP movement, insisted that the Ogonis were still waiting for an apology from Shell: “[T]hey should be able to look us in the face and say ‘We’re sorry for what we have caused you to go through as a result of all these years.’ It’s quite important to us.” Likewise, Tompolo, leader of MEND (the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta)—the largest, most ethnically diverse of the increasingly diffuse and increasingly militant groups that have proliferated in MOSOP’s wake—demanded, in addition to greater resource control, at the very least an apology from Shell and the Nigerian military. Yet in settling the court case, Shell denied any wrongdoing, deeming with outrageous condescension the out-of-court settlement for $. million “a humanitarian gesture.” Many of the delta’s oil minorities, exiled from their subsistence cultures by ruined land, by dead-ﬁsh waterways, by government attacks and by multiplying uncontrollable militant groups, have gravitated toward the city of Port Harcourt. There, write Ike Okonta and Oronto Douglas, hunger leads to anger, and the crushing poverty and marginalization of communities, in contrast to the oil resources that are rightly theirs, provide the trigger. A war of all against all ensues: youths against elders, whom they accuse of selling out to Shell; community against community in competition for scarce Shell contract work; and communities against Shell and the federal government, who deny that their actions have driven the Nigerian people into a dark, impossible corner. Twenty years ago, Saro-Wiwa foresaw this dire turn in an essay called “The Coming War in the Delta.” “The Delta people,” he warned, “must be allowed to join in the lucrative sale of crude oilonly in this way can the cataclysm that is building up in the Delta be avoided. Is anyone listening?” In the aftermath of his “judicial murder” the wider world listened for a time, but one wonders who exactly is listening anymore. Apart, that is, from the Mongolian leader who, when oil was recently discovered in his territory, declared, “[W]e do not want to become another Nigeria.” Fresh oil strikes in Ghana and Uganda have prompted similar responses: exhilaration tempered by fears of letting loose unanswerable, unspeakable forces that rip through the socioenvironmental fabric, leaving behind a Niger Delta redux.  Slow Violence, Gender, and the Environmentalism of the Poor Ah, what an age it is / When to speak of trees is almost a crime / For it is a kind of silence about injustice! —Bertolt Brecht, “An die Nachgeborenen” (To posterity) Kenya’s Green Belt Movement, cofounded by Wangari Maathai, serves as an animating instance of environmental activism among poor communities who have mobilized against slow violence, in this case, the gradual violence of deforestation and soil erosion. At the heart of the movement’s activism stand these urgent questions: What does it mean to be at risk? What does it mean to be secure? In an era when sustainability has become a buzzword, what are the preconditions for what I would call “sustainable security”? And in seeking to advance that elusive goal, how can Maathai as a writer-activist working in conjunction with environmentally motivated women from poor communities, most effectively acknowledge, represent, and counter the violence of delayed effects? Maathai’s memoir, Unbowed, offers us an entry point into the complex, shifting collective strategies that the Green Belt Movement (GBM) devised to oppose foreshortened deﬁnitions of environmental and human security. What emerges from the GBM’s’s ascent is an alternative narrative of national security, one that would challenge the militaristic, male version embodied and imposed by Kenya’s President Daniel arap Moi during his twenty-four years of authoritarian rule from  to. The Green Belt Movement’s rival narrative of national security sought to foreground the longer timeline of slow violence, both in exposing environmental degradation and in advancing environmental recovery. At the same time, Unbowed provides us with an entry point into some challenging questions about the movement memoir as an imaginative form, not least the relationship between singular autobiography and the collective history of a social movement. The Green Belt Movement had modest beginnings. On Earth Day in,Maathai and a small cohort of likeminded women planted seven trees to commemorate Kenyan women who had been environmental activists. By the time Maathai was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in,the movement had created,local tree nurseries and employed,women to plant  million trees, mostly in Kenya, but in a dozen other African countries as well. The movement’s achievements have been both material—providing employment while helping anchor soil, generate shade and ﬁrewood, and replenish watersheds—and symbolic, by inspiring other reforestation movements across the globe. As such, the Green Belt Movement has symbolized and enacted the conviction that (as Lester Brown has stressed in another context) “a strategy for eradicating poverty will not succeed if an economy’s environmental support systems are collapsing.” Early on, Maathai alighted on the idea of tree planting as the movement’s core activity, one that over time would achieve a brilliant symbolic economy, becoming an iconic act of civil disobedience as the women’s efforts to help arrest soil erosion segued into a struggle against illicit deforestation perpetrated by Kenya’s draconian regime. Neither soil erosion nor deforestation posed a sudden threat, but both were persistently and pervasively injurious to Kenya’s long-term human and environmental prospects. The symbolic focus of mass tree plantings helped foster a broad alliance around issues of sustainable security, a set of issues crucial not just to an era of Kenyan authoritarianism, but to the very different context of post-/ America as well, where militaristic ideologies of security have disproportionately and destructively dominated public policy and debate. The risk of ignoring the intertwined issues of slow violence and sustainable security was evident in many American responses to the March  invasion of Iraq, which was widely represented as a clean strategic and moral departure from the ugly spillages of total warfare. Even many liberal commentators adhered to this view. Hendrik Hertzberg, writing in the New Yorker, declared that [w]hatever else can be said about the war against the Iraqi dictatorship that began on March th, it cannot be said that the Anglo-American invaders have pursued anything remotely resembling a policy of killing civilians deliberately. And, so far, they have gone to great tactical and technological lengths to avoid doing it inadvertently.What we do not yet know is whether a different intention, backed by technologies of precision, will produce a different political result. This war, Hertzberg continued, was not the kind that “expanded the battle.ﬁeld to encompass whole societies.” Like most American media commentators at the conﬂict’s outset, Hertzberg bought into the idea that so-called smart bombs exhibit a morally superior intelligence. Yet, depending on the ordnance and strategies deployed, a quick “smart” war may morph into a long-term killer, leaving behind landscapes of dragging death. Precision warfare that has receded into memory often continues, through its active residues, to maim and slaughter imprecisely for generations. The battleﬁeld that unobtrusively threatens to encompass whole societies is of direct pertinence to the conditions that gave rise to Kenya’s Green Belt Movement. The movement emerged in response to what one might call the violence of staggered effects in relation to ecologies of scale. From the perspective of rural Kenyan women whose local livelihood has been threatened by soil erosion’s slow march, what does it mean to be secure in space and time? As Maathai notes, during the rainy season, thousands of tons of topsoil are eroded from Kenya’s countryside by rivers and washed into the ocean and lakes. Additionally, soil is lost through wind erosion in areas where the land is devoid of vegetative cover. Losing topsoil should be considered analogous to losing territory to an invading enemy. And indeed, if any country were so threatened, it would mobilize all available resources, including a heavily armed military, to protect the priceless land. Unfortunately, the loss of soil through these elements has yet to be perceived with such urgency. What is productive about Maathai’s reformulation of security here is her insistence that threats to national territorial integrity—that most deep-seated rationale for war—be expanded to include threats to the nation’s integrity from environmental assaults. To reframe violence in this way is to intervene in the discourse of national defense and, hence, in the psychology of war. Under Kenya’s authoritarian regime, the prevailing response to soil erosion was a mix of denial and resignation; the damage, the loss of land, went unsourced and hence required no concerted mobilization of national resources. The violence occurred in the passive voice, despite the regime’s monumental resource mismanagement. Maathai’s line of reasoning here can be connected to activist writings from elsewhere in the global South, most strikingly to Vandana Shiva’s advocacy for soil security as a form of environmental justice. Shiva’s arguments are inﬂected with the distinctive history in India of the Green Revolution, peasant resistance to industrial agriculture, and the battle against transnational corporate plant patenting, but her insistence on broadening our conception of security is consistent with the stance that underlies Maathai’s soil and tree politics. Soil erosion results in part, of course, from global forms of violence— especially human-induced climate change, to which rural Kenyan women contribute little and can do very little to avert. But the desert’s steady seizure of once viable, fertile land also stems from local forms of slow violence—deforestation and the denuding of vegetation—and it was at those junctures that the Green Belt women found a way to exert their collective agency. As the drivers of the nation’s subsistence agriculture, women inhabited most directly the fallout from an environmental violence that is low in immediate drama but high in long-term consequences. Resource bottlenecks are difﬁcult to dramatize and, deﬁcient in explosive spectacle, typically garner little media attention. Yet the bottlenecks that result from soil erosion and deforestation can fuel conﬂicts for decades, directly and indirectly costing untold lives. Certainly, if we take our cues from the media, it is easy to forget that, in the words of the American agronomist Wes Jackson, “soil is as much a nonrenewable resource as oil.” International and intranational contests over this ﬁnite resource can destabilize whole regions. Soil security ought to be inextricable from national security policy, not least in a society like Kenya, which has lost  percent of its anchoring, cleansing, and cooling forest cover since the arrival of British colonialists in the late nineteenth century. Together transnational, national, and local forces—climate change, an authoritarian regime’s ruthless forest destruction, and rural desperation—fueled the assault on human and environmental security that the Green Belt Movement recognized as inextricably entangled. That threat had its roots in a colonial history of developmental deforestation, most memorably evoked in Ngugi wa Thiong’o’s epic novel Petals of Blood, where an elder remarks how “the land was covered with forests. The trees called rain. They also cast a shadow on the land. But the forest was eaten by the railway. You remember they used to come for wood as far as here—to feed the iron thing. Aah, they only knew how to eat, how to take away everything.” Despite Ngugi’s forceful critique of colonial and neocolonial land politics, his novels tend—as Laura Wright notes—to fall back on an essentialist feminizing of the soil, replete with oppositions between a precolonial virginal purity and neocolonialism as prostitution. One of the key challenges facing Maathai, as a writer and activist, was how to dramatize the gendered dynamics of Kenyan land politics without submitting to the sentimental essentialism that mars Ngugi’s novels. To understand the angle of her approach requires that we engage the metaphoric underpinnings of the GBM’s gender and civic politics. The Theatre of the Tree The Green Belt Movement’s achievements in engaging the violence of deforestation and soil erosion ﬂowed from three critical strategies. First, tree planting served not only as a practical response to an attritional environmental calamity but to create, in addition, a symbolic hub for political resistance and for media coverage of an otherwise amorphous issue. Second, the movement was able to articulate the discourse of violent land loss to a deeper narrative of territorial theft, as perpetrated ﬁ rst by British colonialists and later by their neocolonial legatees. Third, the Green Belt Movement made strategic use of what one might call intersectional environmentalism, broadening their base and credibility by aligning themselves with—and stimulating—other civil rights campaigns that were not expressly environmental, like the campaigns for women’s rights, for the release of political prisoners, and for greater political transparency. The choice of tree planting as the Green Belt Movement’s deﬁning act proved politically astute. Here was a simple, pragmatic, yet powerfully ﬁgurative act that connected with many women’s quotidian lives as tillers of the soil. Soil erosion and deforestation are corrosive, compound threats that damage vital watersheds, exacerbate the silting and desiccation of rivers, erode topsoil, engender ﬁrewood and food shortages, and ultimately contribute to malnutrition. Maathai and her allies succeeded in using these compound threats to forge a compound alliance among authoritarianism’s discounted casualties, especially marginalized women, citizens whose environmental concerns were indissociable from their concerns over food security and political accountability. At political ﬂashpoints during the s and s, these convergent concerns made the Green Belt Movement a powerful player in a broad-based civil rights coalition that gave thousands of Kenyans a revived sense of civic agency and national possibility. The movement probed and widened the ﬁ ssures within the state’s authoritarian structures, clamoring for answerability within what Ato Quayson, in another context, calls “the culture of impunity.” The theatre of the tree afforded the social movement a rich symbolic vocabulary that helped extend its civic reach. Maathai recast the simple gesture of digging a hole and putting a sapling in it as a way of “planting the seeds of peace.” To plant trees was to metaphorically cultivate democratic change; with a slight vegetative tweak, the gesture could breathe new life into the dead metaphor of grassroots democracy. Within the campaign against one-party rule, activists could establish a ready symbolic connection between environmental erosion and the erosion of civil rights. At the heart of this symbolic nexus was a contest over deﬁnitions of growth: each tree planted by the Green Belt Movement stood as a tangible, biological image of steady, sustainable growth, a dramatic counterimage to the ruling elite’s kleptocratic image of “growth,” a euphemism for their high-speed piratical plunder of the nation’s coffers and ﬁnite natural resources. Relevant here is William Finnegan’s observation, in a broader international context, that “even economic growth, which is regarded nearly universally as an overall social good, is not necessarily so. There is growth so unequal that it heightens social conﬂict and increases repression. There is growth so environmentally destructive that it detracts, in sum, from a community’s quality of life.” Certainly, there is something perverse about an economic order in which the unsustainable, ill-managed plunder of resources is calculated as productive growth rather than a loss of GNP. Within the metaphoric groves of “growth,” we have witnessed a huge spectrum of literary tree politics. Bertolt Brecht, from his Danish exile in  most memorably lamented the dark times he lived in, times of “terrible tidings”: “Ah, what an age it is / When to speak of trees is almost a crime / For it is a kind of silence about injustice!” The poem that bears those words— “An die Nachgeborenen” (To posterity or To the unborn)—has sometimes been invoked by those who wish to distinguish the hard, clear clarion call of radical politics from the soft claims of environmentalism. Yet Brecht was clearly writing into a particular cultural moment—into an ascendant fascism, a powerful strain of blood-and-soil German romanticism implicated in Nazism’s ascent. As Kenya’s Green Belt Movement testiﬁ es, there are other eras when, for the sake of the unborn, we need to talk about trees with unremitting urgency; indeed, when to be silent about trees is to become complicit in an injustice to posterity. To plant trees is to work toward cultivating change, in the fullest sense of that phrase. In an era of widening social inequity and unshared growth, the replenished forest can offer an egalitarian, participatory image of growth—growth as sustainable over the long haul. The Moi regime viliﬁed Maathai as an enemy of growth, development, and progress, all discourses the ruling cabal had used to mask its high-speed plunder. Saplings in hand, the Green Belt Movement returned the blighted trope of growth to its vital, biological roots. To plant a tree is an act of intergenerational optimism, a selﬂess act at once practical and utopian, an investment in a communal future the planter will not see; to plant a tree is to offer shade to unborn strangers. To act in this manner was to secede ethically from Kenya’s top-down culture of ruthless short-term self-interest. (Kenyan intellectuals used to quip that under Moi l’etat c’est Moi.) A social movement devoted to tree planting, in addition to regenerating embattled forests, thus also helped regenerate an endangered vision of civic time. Against the backdrop of Kenya’s winner-takes-alland-takes-it-now kleptocracy, the movement afﬁrmed a radically subversive ethic—an ethic of selﬂessness—allied to an equally subversive timeframe, the longue durée of patient growth for sustainable collective gain. By,the Moi regime had come to treat tree planting as an incendiary, seditious act of civil disobedience. That year, the showdown between the Green Belt Movement and state power came to a head over the ,acre Karura Forest. Word spread that the regime was felling swathes of the public forest, a green lung for Nairobi and a critical catchment area for four rivers. The cleared, appropriated land was being sold on the cheap to cabinet ministers and other presidential cronies who planned to build luxury developments on it —golf courses, hotels, and gated communities. Maathai and her followers, armed with nothing but oak saplings, with which they sought to begin replanting the plundered forest, were set upon by guards and goons wielding pangas, clubs, and whips. Maathai had her head bloodied by a panga; protestors were arrested and imprisoned. The theatre of the tree has accrued a host of potent valences at different points in human history: both the planting and the felling of forests have become highly charged political acts. In the England that the Puritans ﬂ ed, for example, trees were markers of aristocratic privilege; hence on numerous occasions, insurrectionists chopped or burned down those exclusionary groves. After the Restoration, notes Michael Pollan, “replanting trees was regarded as a ﬁtting way for a gentleman to demonstrate his loyalty to the monarchy, and several million hardwoods were planted between  and.” By contrast, early American colonists typically viewed tree felling as an act of progress that could double as a way of improving the land and laying claiming to it. Since the early s, a strong but varied transnational tradition of civil disobedience has gathered force around the fate of the forest. In March,a band of hill peasants in the isolated Himalayan village of Mandal devised the strategy of tree hugging to thwart loggers who had come to fell hornbeam trees in a state forest on which the peasants depended for their livelihood. This was the beginning of a succession of such protests that launched India’s Chipko movement. Three years later, in the Brazilian Amazon, Francisco Chico Mendes led a series of standoffs by rubber tappers and their allies who sought to arrest uncontrolled felling and burning by rancher colonists. In Thailand, a Buddhist monk was jailed when he sought to safeguard trees by ordaining them, while Julia Butterﬂy Hill achieved celebrity visibility during her two-year tree sit to protest the clear-cutting of endangered California redwoods. What distinguished the Green Belt Movement, like the Chipko movement before it, was the way that activists protesting deforestation went beyond what would become standard strategies of environmental civil disobedience in the global North (sit-ins, tree hugging, or chaining oneself to a tree). For the Kenyan and Indian protestors, active reforestation became the primary symbolic vehicle for their civil disobedience. Under an undemocratic dispensation, the threatened forest can be converted into a particularly dramatic theatre for reviving civic agency because it throws into relief incompatible visions of public land. To Kenya’s authoritarian president, the forest was state owned, and because he and his cronies treated the nation as identical to the state, he felt at license to fell national forests and sell off the nation’s public land. To the activists, by contrast, the forest was not a private presidential ﬁefdom, but commonage, the indivisible property of the people. The regime’s contemptuous looting of Karura Forest was thus read as symptomatic of a wider contempt for the rights of the poor. The Green Belt Movement’s campaign to replant Karura assumed a potency that reverberated beyond the fate of one particular forest; their efforts served as a dramatic initiative to repossess, for the polity, not just plundered public land and resources, but plundered political agency. Outrage over the Karura assaults soon swelled to students and other disaffected groups in Nairobi, until the regime was forced to suspend its attacks on both the women and the trees. In this way, the theatre of the tree fortiﬁ ed the bond between a beleaguered environment and a beleaguered polity. For those who perpetrate slow violence, their greatest ally is the protracted, convoluted vapor trail of blame. If slow violence typically occurs in the passive voice—without clearly articulated agency—the attritional deforestation of Karura and other public lands offered a clearer case of decisive accountability than, say, soil erosion. The Green Belt Movement’s theatre of the tree inverted the syntax of violence by naming the agents of destruction. Through the drama of the axed tree and the planted sapling, Maathai and her allies staged a showdown between the forces of incremental violence and the forces of incremental peace; in so doing they gave a symbolic and dramatic shape to public discontent over the ofﬁcial culture of plunder. Ultimately, Maathai saw in the culture of tree planting a way of interrupting the cycle of poverty, a cycle whereby, as she put it, “poverty is both a cause and a symptom of environmental degradation.” Colonialism, Mau Mau, and the Forest in National Memory In using the theatre of the forest to reanimate political debate around ideas of sustainable growth, grassroots democracy, erosion of rights, and the seeds of change, Maathai and her resource rebels also tapped into a robust national memory of popular resistance to colonialism—above all, resistance to the unjust seizure of land. Maathai’s memoir doesn’t engage this question of anticolonial memory directly, but it is surely pertinent to the political traction that her movement attained given the particular place of the forest in Kenya’s national symbolic archive of resistance. The confrontation, during Moi’s neocolonial rule, between the forces of deforestation and the forces of reforestation was played out against the historic backdrop of the forest as a redoubt of anticolonialism, a heroic place that, during the Mau Mau uprising from  to,achieved a mythic potency among both the British colonialists and those Kenyans—primarily Kikuyu—who fought for freedom and the restitution of their land. In the dominant colonial literature about Mau Mau (political tracts, memoirs, and ﬁction), the forest appears as a place beyond reach of civilization, a place of atavistic savagery where “terrorists” banded together to perform degenerate rites of barbarism. For those Kenyans who sought an end to their colonial subjugation, the forest represented something else entirely: it was a place of cultural regeneration and political refusal, a proving ground where resistance ﬁghters pledged oaths of unity, above all, an oath to reclaim, by force if necessary, their people’s stolen land. The forest thus became the geographical and symbolic nexus of a peasant insurrection, as a host of Kenyan writers, Meja Mwangi, Wachira, Mangua, and Ngugi wa Thiong’o among them, have all testiﬁ ed. From an environmental perspective, A Grain of Wheat, Ngugi’s novel of the Mau Mau uprising, is particularly suggestive. As Byron Caminero-Santangelo observes, most of the novel’s British characters work at the Githima Forestry and Agricultural Research Station, an institution whose ofﬁ cial aims are to advance agriculture and conservation, but which was founded “as part of a new colonial development plan.” The novel unfolds in part, then, as a clash between rival cultures of nature: between nature as instrument of colonial control (under the guise of development) and nature as a sustaining animist force, an anticolonial ally of Mau Mau forest ﬁghters pledging oaths of liberation. The gender politics of all this are complex and compelling. In the s, the forest served as a bastion not just of anticolonialism but of warrior masculinity. Thirty years later, it was nonviolent women, armed only with oak saplings and a commitment to civil disobedience, who embodied the political resistance to neocolonialism. So the showdown at Karura reprised the anticolonial history of forest resistance in a different key: now the core ﬁghters—Maathai’s “foresters without diplomas”—were female and unarmed. Does this double rescripting of resistance help explain the particularly vicious backlash against the women from Kenya’s male political establishment? Intersectional Environmentalism, Gender, and Conservation The colonial backdrop to the achievements of the Green Belt Movement surfaces not just through the memory of Mau Mau forest ﬁghters but also through the contrast between colonial conservation and what one might call intersectional environmentalism. Maathai was never a single-issue environmentalist: she sought, from the outset, to integrate and advance the causes of environmental, women’s, and human rights by engendering stronger civic institutions. The Green Belt Movement emerged in the late s under the auspices of the women’s movement: it was through Maathai’s involvement in the Kenya Association of University of Women that she was ﬁrst invited to join a local Environment Liaison Centre and from there was approached by representatives from the United Nations Environmental Pro-gramme, which led in turn to ever-widening circles of international access. Maathai’s intersectional approach to environmental justice contrasted starkly with the dominant colonial tradition of conservation, which had focused on charismatic megafauna. That sharply masculinist tradition—in Kenya and, more broadly, in East and Southern Africa—was associated with forced removal, with colonial appropriation of land, and with an antihuman ecology. That tradition remains part of Kenya’s economic legacy, a legacy associated not just with human displacement but with local exclusion from elite cultures of leisure. In ecological as in human terms, Maathai’s angle of approach was not top down: instead of focusing on the dramatic end of the biotic chain—the elephants, rhinos, lions, and leopards that have preoccupied colonial hunters, conservationists, and foreign tourists—she drew attention to a more mundane and pervasive issue: the impact of accumulative resource mismanagement on biodiversity, soil quality, food security, and the life prospects of rural women and their families. 